<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>Mary Magdalen</title>
                <author><name reg="Saltus, Edgar">Edgar Saltus</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2010-03-05">March 5, 2010</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>31510</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <bibl><title>Mary Magdalen: A Chronicle</title>
                <author><name reg="Saltus, Edgar">Edgar Saltus</name></author>
                <imprint><pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
                <publisher>Brentano’s</publisher>
                <date>1919</date></imprint></bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="en" />
            <language id="el"></language>
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2010-03-05">March 5, 2010</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by Bryan Ness, Stefan Cramme and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team 
                    at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material
                    from the Google Print project.)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .center    { text-align: center }
        .Greek     { font-style: normal }
        .italic    { font-style: italic }
        .smallcaps { font-variant: small-caps }
        figure     { text-align: center }
        head       { text-align: center }
        @media pdf {
        figure     { width: 50% }
        }
      </pgStyleSheet>
        
    </pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always; center">
        <pb/>
        
        <p rend="margin-bottom: 1">
            By Mr. Saltus
        </p>
       
           <list> <item>HISTORIA AMORIS</item>
            <item>THE POMPS OF SATAN</item>
            <item>IMPERIAL PURPLE</item>
            <item>THE ANATOMY OF NEGATION</item>
            <item>VANITY SQUARE</item>
            <item>THE PERFUME OF EROS</item></list>
        
        </div><titlePage rend="center; page-break-before: right">
        <pb/>
        
            <docTitle><titlePart><hi rend="font-size: xx-large">MARY MAGDALEN</hi></titlePart>
                <lb/><lb/>
            <titlePart><hi rend='italic; font-size: x-large'>A Chronicle</hi></titlePart>
            </docTitle>
            
            <byline rend="margin-top: 2"><hi rend='italic'>By</hi>
            <lb/><lb/>
            <docAuthor><hi rend="font-size: large">EDGAR SALTUS</hi></docAuthor>
            </byline>
            <lb/><lb/><lb/>
          <docImprint rend="margin-top:4">
              NEW YORK<lb/>
              <hi rend="font-size: large">BRENTANO’S</hi><lb/>
              <docDate>MCMXIX</docDate>
          </docImprint>
        
        </titlePage><div rend="page-break-before: always">
        <pb/>
        
            <p rend="center"><hi rend='smallcaps; font-size: small'>Copyright, 1891,
                <lb/>By EDGAR SALTUS.</hi></p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
        <pb/>
<head>Contents</head>
<divGen type="toc"/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
        <p rend="center">
            <hi rend="font-size: large">MARY MAGDALEN</hi>
        </p>
        
        <pb/>
    </div>
</front>
<body lang="en"><div rend="page-break-before: right">

<pb n="17"/><anchor id="Pg017"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg018"/>

<pb n="19"/><anchor id="Pg019"/>
<head rend="page-break-before: right">I.</head>

<p>
<q>Three to one on Scarlet!</q>
</p>

<p>
Throughout the brand-new circus were
the eagerness, the gesticulations, shouts,
and murmurs of an impatient throng. On
a ledge above the entrance a man stood,
a strip of silk extended in his finger-tips.
Beneath, on either side, were gates.
About him were series of ascending tiers,
close-packed, and brilliant with multicolored
robes and parasols. The sand of
the track was very white: where the sunlight
fell it had the glitter of broken
glass. In the centre was a low wall; at
one end were pillars and seven great
balls of wood; at the other, seven dolphins,
their tails in the air. The uproar
<pb n="20"/><anchor id="Pg020"/>mounted in unequal vibrations, and
stirred the pulse. The air was heavy
with odors, with the emanations of the
crowd, the cloy of myrrh. Through the
exits whiffs of garlic filtered from the
kitchens below, and with them, from the
exterior arcades, came the beat of timbrels,
the click of castanets. Overhead
was a sky of troubled blue; beyond, a
lake.
</p>

<p>
<q>They are off!</q>
</p>

<p>
The strip of silk had fluttered and
fallen, the gates flew open, there was a
rumble of wheels, a whirlwind of sand,
a yell that deafened, and four tornadoes
burst upon the track.
</p>

<p>
They were shell-shaped, and before
each six horses tore abreast. Between
the horses’ ears were swaying feathers;
their manes had been dyed clear pink,
the forelocks puffed; and as they bounded,
the drivers, standing upright, had the
skill to guide but not the strength to
curb. About their waists the reins were
tied; at the side a knife hung; from the
forehead the hair was shaven; and
every<pb n="21"/><anchor id="Pg021"/>thing they wore, the waistcoat, the short
skirt, the ribbons, was of one color, scarlet,
yellow, emerald, or blue: and this
color, repeated on the car and on the
harness, distinguished them from those
with whom they raced.
</p>

<p>
Already the cars had circled the hippodrome
four times. There were but three
more rounds, and Scarlet, which in the
beginning had trailed applause behind
it as a torch trails smoke, lagged now
a little to the rear. Green was leading.
Its leadership did not seem to please; it
was cursed at and abused, threatened
with naked fist; yet when for the sixth
time it turned the terminal pillar, a shout
that held the thunder of Atlas leaped
abroad. Where the yellow car, pursued
by the blue, had been, was now a mass of
sickening agitation—twelve fallen horses
kicking each other into pulp, the drivers
brained already; and down upon that
barrier of blood and death swept the
scarlet car. In a second it veered and
passed; in that second a flash of steel
had out the reins, and, as the car swung
<pb n="22"/><anchor id="Pg022"/>round, the driver, released, was tossed to
the track. What then befell him no one
cared. Stable-men were busy there; the
car itself, unguided, continued vertiginously
on its course. If it had lagged
before, there was no lagging now. The
hoofs that beat upon the ring plunged
with it through the din down upon Emerald,
and beyond it to the goal. And as
the last dolphin vanished and the seventh
ball was removed, the palm was granted,
and the spectators shouted a salutation
to the giver of the games—Herod Antipas,
tetrarch of Galilee.
</p>

<p>
He was superb, this Antipas. His
beard was like a lady’s fan. On his
cheeks was a touch of alkanet; his hair,
powdered blue, was encircled by a diadem
set with gems. About his shoulders was
a mantle that had a broad purple border;
beneath it was a tunic of yellow silk.
Between the railing of the tribune in
which he sat one foot was visible, shod
with badger’s skin, dyed blood-red. He
was superb, but his eyelids drooped. He
had a straight nose and a retreating
fore<pb n="23"/><anchor id="Pg023"/>head, a physiognomy that was at once
weak and vicious. He looked melancholy;
it may be that he was bored.
At the salutation, however, he affected a
smile, and motioned that the games
should continue. And as the signals, the
dolphins and the seven balls, appeared
again, his thoughts, forsaking the circus,
went back to Rome.
</p>

<p>
Insecure in the hearts of his people,
uncertain even of the continued favor of
the volatile monster who was lounging
then in his Caprian retreat, it was with
the idea of pleasing the one, of flattering
the other, that he had instituted the
games. For here in his brand-new Tiberias,
a city which he had built in a
minute, whose colonnades and porticoes
he had bought ready-made in Rome, and
had erected by means of that magic which
only the Romans possessed—in this capital
of a parvenu was a mongrel rabble of
Greeks, Cypriotes, Egyptians, Cappadocians,
Syrians, and Jews, whose temper
was uncertain, and whose rebellion to be
feared.
</p>

<pb n="24"/><anchor id="Pg024"/>

<p>
<hi rend="italic">Annonâ et spectaculis</hi> indeed! Antipas
knew the dictum well; and with an uprising
in the yonderland, and a sedition
under his feet, what more could he do
than quell the first with his mercenaries,
and disarm the second with his games?
Tiberius, whom he emulated, never
deigned to appear at the hippodrome;
it was a way he had of showing his contempt
for a nation. Antipas might have
imitated his sovereign in that, only he
was not sure that Tiberius would take
the compliment as it was meant. He
might view such abstention as the airs
of a trumpery tetrarch, and depose him
there and then. He was irascible, and
when displeased there were dungeons at
his command which reopened with difficulty,
and where existence was not secure.
Ah, that sausage of blood and mud, how
he feared and envied him! An emperor
now, a god hereafter, truly the dominion
of this world and a part of the next was
a matter concerning which fear and envy
well might be.
</p>

<p>
And as Antipas’ vagabond fancy roamed
<pb n="25"/><anchor id="Pg025"/>in and out through the possibilities of
the Caesar’s sway, unconsciously he
thought of another monster, the son of
a priest of Ascalon, who had defied the
Sanhedrim, won Cleopatra, murdered the
woman he loved the most, conquered
Judæa and found it too small for his
magnificence—of that Herod in fact, his
own father, who gave to Jerusalem her
masterpiece of marble and gold, and
meanwhile, drunk with the dream of empire,
had made himself successor of
Solomon, Sultan of Israel, King of the
Jews, and who, even as he died, had
vomited death and crowns, diadems and
crucifixions.
</p>

<p>
It was through his legacy that Antipas
ruled. The kingdom had been sliced into
three parts, of one of which Augustus
had made a province; over another a
brother whom he hated ruled; and he
had but this third part, the smallest yet
surely the most fair. Its unparalleled
garden surrounded him, and its eye, the
lake, was just beyond. In the amphitheatre
the hills formed was a city of
<pb n="26"/><anchor id="Pg026"/>pink and blue marble, of cupolas, porticoes,
volutes, bronze doors, and copper
roofs. Along the fringe of the shore were
Choraizin and Bethsaïda, purple with
pomegranates, Capharnahum, beloved for
its honey, and Magdala, scented with
spice. The slopes and intervales were
very green where they were not yellow,
and there were terraces of grape, glittering
cliffs, and a sky of troubled blue,
wadded with little gold-edged clouds.
</p>

<p>
Yes, it was paradise, but it was not
monarchy. It was to that he aspired. As
he mused, a rancid-faced woman decked
with paint and ostrich-plumes snarled in
his ear:
</p>

<p>
<q>What have you heard of Iohanan?</q>
</p>

<p>
And as with a gesture he signified
that he had heard nothing, she snarled
again.
</p>

<p>
Antipas turned to her reflectively, but
it was of another that he thought—the
brown-eyed bride that Arabia had given
him, the lithe-limbed princess of the
desert whose heart had beaten on his
own, whom he had loved with all the
<pb n="27"/><anchor id="Pg027"/>strength of youth and weakness, and
whom he had deserted while at Rome
for his brother’s wife, his own niece,
Herodias, who snarled at his side.
</p>

<p>
Behind her were her women, and
among them was one who, as the cars
swept by, turned her head with that
movement a flower has which a breeze
has stirred. Her eyes were sultry, darkened
with stibium; on her cheek was the
pink of the sea-shell, and her lips made
one vermilion rhyme. The face was
oval and rather small; and though it was
beautiful as victory, the wonder of her
eyes, which looked the haunts of hope
fulfilled, the wonder of her mouth, which
seemed to promise more than any mortal
mouth could give, were forgotten in her
hair, which was not orange nor flame,
but a blending of both. And now, as the
cars passed, her thin nostrils quivered,
her hand rose as a bird does and fluttered
with delight.
</p>

<p>
On the adjacent tiers were Greeks,
fat-calved Cypriotes, Cappadocians with
flowers painted on their skin, red
Egypt<pb n="28"/><anchor id="Pg028"/>ians, Thracian mercenaries, Galilean
fishermen, and a group of Lydians in
women’s clothes.
</p>

<p>
On the tier just beyond was a man
gazing wistfully at the woman that sat
behind Herodias. He was tall and sinewy,
handsome with the comeliness of the East.
His beard was full, unmarred at the
corners; his name was Judas. Now and
then he moistened his under lip, and a
Thracian who sat at his side heard him
murmur <q>Mary</q> and some words of
Syro-Chaldaic which the Thracian did
not understand.
</p>

<p>
To him Mary paid no attention. She
had turned from the track. An officer
had entered the tetrarch’s tribune and
addressed the prince. Antipas started;
Herodias colored through her paint. The
latter evidently was pleased.
</p>

<p>
<q>Iohanan!</q> she exclaimed. <q>To
Machærus with him! You may believe
in fate and mathematics; I believe in
the axe.</q>
</p>

<p>
And questioningly Herodias looked at
her husband, who avoided her look, yet
<pb n="29"/><anchor id="Pg029"/>signified his assent to the command she
had given.
</p>

<p>
The din continued. From the tier beyond,
Judas still gazed into the perils of
Mary’s eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear God,</q> he muttered, in answer
to an anterior thought, <q>it would be the
birthday of my life.</q>
</p>

<pb n="30"/><anchor id="Pg030"/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="31"/><anchor id="Pg031"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER II.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg032"/>

<pb n="33"/><anchor id="Pg033"/>
<head rend="page-break-before: right">II.</head>

<p>
<q>O Prophet Iohanan, how fair you
are!</q>
</p>

<p>
Iohanan was hideous. His ankles were
in stocks, a chain about his waist was
looped in a ring that hung from the wall.
About his body were tattered furs, his
hair was tangled, the face drawn and
yellow. Vermin were visible on his person.
His lips twitched, and his gums,
discolored, were as those of a camel that
has journeyed too far. A tooth projected,
green as a fresh almond is; the chin projected
too, and from it on one side a rill
of saliva dripped upon the naked breast.
On the terrace he was a blur, a nightmare
in a garden.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, how fair!</q>
</p>

<p>
Tantalizing as temptation, Mary stood
just beyond his reach. Her eyes were
full of compliments, her body was bent,
<pb n="34"/><anchor id="Pg034"/>and, the folds of her gown held back,
she swayed a little, in the attitude of one
cajoling a tiger. She was quite at home
and at her ease, and yet prepared for instant
flight.
</p>

<p>
Iohanan, or John—surnamed, because
of practices of his, the Baptist—beckoned
her to approach. In his eyes was
the innocence that oxen have.
</p>

<p>
<q>My body is chained, but my soul is
free!</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary made a pirouette, and through
the terrace of the citadel the rattles on
her ankles rang.
</p>

<p>
It was appalling, this citadel; it dominated
the entire land. Perched on a
peak of basalt, it overhung an abyss in
which Asphalitis, the Bitter Sea, lay, a
stretch of sapphire to the sun. In the
distance were the heights of Abraham,
the crests of Gilead. Before it was the
infinite, behind it the desert. At its base
a hamlet crouched, and a path hewn in
the rock crawled in zigzags to its gates.
Irregular walls surrounded it, in some
places a hundred cubits high, and in
<pb n="35"/><anchor id="Pg035"/>each of the many angles was a turret.
Seen from below it was a threat in stone,
but within was a caress, one of those
rapturous palaces that only the Orientals
build. It was called Machærus. Peopled
with slaves and legends, it was a
haunt of ghosts and fierce delights.
</p>

<p>
And now as Mary tripped before the
prophet the walls alone repelled. The
terrace was a garden in which were lilies
and sentries. For entrance there was a
portal of red porphyry, above which was
a balcony hemmed by a balustrade of
yellow Numidian stone.
</p>

<p>
Against it Antipas leaned. He had
been eyeing the desert in tremulous surmise.
The day before, he had caught
the glitter of lances, therewith spirals of
distant smoke, and he had become fearful
lest Aretas, that king of Arabia Petræa
whose daughter he had deserted,
might be meditating attack. But now
there was nothing, at most a triangular
mass speeding westwards, of which only
the edges moved, and which he knew to
be a flight of cranes.
</p>

<pb n="36"/><anchor id="Pg036"/>

<p>
He took heart again and gazed in the
valley below. It was the anniversary of
his birth. To celebrate it he had invited
the stewards of his lands, the notables of
Galilee, the elect of Jerusalem, the procurator
of Judæa, the emir of Tadmor,
mountaineers and Pharisees, Scribes and
herdsmen.
</p>

<p>
But in the valley only a few shepherds
were visible. Along the ramparts soldiers
paced. At the further end of the
terrace a group of domestics was busy
with hampers and luggage. The day was
solemnly still, exquisitely clear; and between
two hills came a glare of gold projected
from the Temple of Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Through the silence rang the tinkle of
the rattles that Mary wore. The prophet
was beckoning her.
</p>

<p>
<q>And Martha?</q> the tetrarch heard him
ask.
</p>

<p>
The pirouette ceased awkwardly.
Mary’s eyes <anchor id="corr036"/><corr sic="forget">forgot</corr> their compliments.
<corr sic="Hew">Her</corr> brows contracted, and, as though
perplexed, she held her head a little to
one side.
</p>

<pb n="37"/><anchor id="Pg037"/>

<p>
<q>There,</q> he added, <q>there, I know you
well. It was at Bethany I saw you first.
Yes, yes, I remember perfectly; you were
leaving, and Martha was in tears. Only
a little since I had speech with her. She
spoke of you; she knew you were called
the Magdalen. No,</q> he continued, for
Mary had shrunk back, <q>no, I will not
curse. There is another by whom you
will be blessed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary laughed. <q>I am going to Rome.
Tiberius will give me a palace. I shall
sleep on the down the Teutons bring. I
shall drink pearls dissolved in falernian.
I shall sup on peacocks’ tongues.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, Mary, Rome you will never see.
The Eternal has you in His charge. Your
shame will be washed away.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shame to you,</q> she interrupted.
<q>Shame and starvation too.</q> She made
as though she were about to pirouette
again. <q>Whom are you talking of?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>One whose shoes I am unworthy to
bear.</q>
</p>

<p>
For a moment he seemed to meditate;
then, with the melancholy of one
renounce<pb n="38"/><anchor id="Pg038"/>ing some immense ambition, he murmured,
half to himself, half to the sky, <q>For him
to increase I must diminish.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>As for that, you are not much to look
at now. I must go. I must braid my
hair; the emir’s eyes are eager.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mary,</q> he hissed, and the sudden asperity
of his voice coerced her as a bit
might do, <q>you will go to Capharnahum,
you will seek him, you will say Iohanan
is descended into the tombs to announce
the Son of David.</q>
</p>

<p>
Through the lateral entrance to the
terrace a number of guests had entered.
From the balcony above, Antipas leaned
and listened. Some one touched him;
it was Herodias.
</p>

<p>
<q>The procurator is coming,</q> she announced.
<q>You should be at the gate.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q>
</p>

<p>
He seemed indifferent. What Iohanan
had said concerning the Son of David
stirred him like the point of <anchor id="corr038"/><corr sic="omitted">a</corr> sword. He
felt that there could be no such person;
his father had put a stop to all that. And
yet, if there were!
</p>

<pb n="39"/><anchor id="Pg039"/>

<p>
His indifference surprised Herodias.
</p>

<p>
<q>What are you staring at?</q> she asked;
and to assure herself she looked over
the balustrade. <q>That carrion? You
should——</q>
</p>

<p>
Her hand drawn across her throat
completed the sentence.
</p>

<p>
The tetrarch shook his head. There
was no hurry. Then, too, the prophet
was useful. He reviled Jerusalem, and
that flattered Galilee. But there was
another reason, which he kept to himself.
Iohanan affected him as no one
had done before.
</p>

<p>
He feared him, chained though he was,
and into that fear something akin to
admiration entered. In his heart he
wished he had let him alone. No, there
was no hurry. As he assured her of that
the prophet looked up.
</p>

<p>
<q>Jezebel!</q>
</p>

<p>
The guests approached. Their number
had increased. There were Greek
merchants from Hippos and Sepphoris,
Pharisees from Jericho, and Scribes from
<pb n="40"/><anchor id="Pg040"/>Jerusalem. Herodias clapped her hands.
A negro, naked to the waist, appeared.
</p>

<p>
<q>Take him below.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the guests surrounded Iohanan.
The Pharisees recognized him at once.
He was the terror of the hierarchs.
</p>

<p>
As he cried out at Herodias he seemed
as though he would rise and wrench his
bonds and mount to where she was. His
eyes had lost their pathos; they blazed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Woe unto you!</q> he shouted, <q>and
woe unto your barren bed! Though you
hid in the bowels of the earth, in the
uttermost depths of a jungle, the stench
of your incest would betray you. Woe
unto you, I say; the swine will turn
from you, the Eternal will rend you, and
the heart of hell will vomit you back!</q>
</p>

<p>
Herodias shook with anger. She was
livid. Murmurs circulated through the
increasing throng.
</p>

<p>
The Pharisees edged nearer. On their
foreheads were slips of vellum on which
passages of the Law had been inscribed.
About their left arms other slips extended
spiralwise from the elbow to the
<pb n="41"/><anchor id="Pg041"/>end of the third finger. They were in
white; where their garments had become
soiled, the spots had been chalked.
</p>

<p>
To them the prophet showed his teeth.
<q>And woe unto you too, race of vipers,
bladders of wind! As the fire devours
the stubble, and the flame consumes the
chaff, so your root will be rottenness
and your seed go up as dust. Fear will
engulf you like a torrent. The high
peaks will be broken, the mountains will
sever, and night be upon all. The valleys
and hills will be strewn with your
corpses, the rocks will run with your
blood, the plain will drink it, and the
vultures feast on your flesh. Woe unto
you all, I say, that call good evil, and
evil good!</q>
</p>

<p>
The invective continued. It enveloped
the world. Everything was to be destroyed.
Presently it subsided; the voice
of the prophet sank lower; his eyes
sought the sky, the pupils dilated; and
the dream of his nation, the triumphant
future, the sanctification of the faithful,
<pb n="42"/><anchor id="Pg042"/>the magnificence that was to be, poured
rapturously from his lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>The whole land will glow with glory.
The sky will be a rose in bloom. The
meadows will rejoice, and the earth will
be filled with men and maidens singing
and kneeling to Thee, Immanuel, whom
I await.</q>
</p>

<p>
The vision would have expanded, perhaps,
but the chain that bound him was
loosed, sinewy arms were dragging him
away. As he went, he glared up again at
Herodias. His face had lost its beatitude.
</p>

<p>
<q>You will be stripped of your purple,
Jezebel; your diadem will be trodden
under foot. The pains of a woman in
travail will be as joys unto yours. There
will be not enough stones to throw at
you, and the abomination of your lust
will bellow, Accursed, even beyond the
tomb.</q>
</p>

<p>
The anathema fainted in the distance.
The Scribes consulted between their
teeth. By the Pharisees Antipas was
blamed. A merchant from Hippos did
<pb n="43"/><anchor id="Pg043"/>not understand, and the Law was explained.
That a man should marry his
brother’s wife was a duty, only in this instance
it had not occurred to the brother
to die beforehand. Then, again, by her
first husband Herodias had a child, and
in that was the abomination.
</p>

<p>
The merchant did not wholly grasp the
distinction, but he nodded as though he
had.
</p>

<p>
<q>There was a child, was there?</q>
</p>

<p>
A captain of the garrison answered:
<q>A girl, Salomè.</q>
</p>

<p>
He said nothing further, but the merchant
could see that his mouth watered
at the thought of her.
</p>

<p>
The crowd had become very dense.
Suddenly a trumpet blared. At the
gate was Pontius Pilate. On his head
was a high and dazzling helmet. His tunic
was short, open at the neck. His legs
were bare. He was shod with shoes that
left the toes exposed. From his cuirass
a gorgon’s head had, in deference to local
prejudice, been effaced; in its stead were
scrolls and thunderbolts. From the
<pb n="44"/><anchor id="Pg044"/>belt rows of straps, embroidered and
fringed, fell nearly to the knee. He held
his head in the air. His features were
excellent, and his beard hung in rows of
short overlapping curls.
</p>

<p>
Behind him was his body-guard. Before
him Antipas stood, welcoming the
Roman in Greek.
</p>

<p>
In the sky now were the advancing
steps of night; in crevices of the basalt
the leaves of the baaras weed had begun
to flicker. It was time for the festival to
begin; and, preceding the guests, Antipas
passed into a hall beyond.
</p>

<p>
It was oblong, curved at the ends, and
so vast that the roof was vague. On the
walls were slabs of different colors, marble
spotted like the skin of serpents, and
onyx flecked with violet. On two sides
were galleries supported by columns of
sandstone. A third gallery formed a
semicircle. Opposite, at the further end,
on a dais, was the table of the tetrarch.
</p>

<p>
Antipas faced the assemblage. At his
left was the procurator, at his right the
emir of Tadmor. Curtains were looped
<pb n="45"/><anchor id="Pg045"/>on either side. Above were panels; they
separated, and flowers fell. On a little stool
next to the couch on which the emir lay
was a beautiful boy with curly hair.
The couch of the procurator was covered
with a dim Babylonian shawl. That of
the tetrarch was of ivory incrusted with
gold. All three were cushioned.
</p>

<p>
As the guests entered they were sprinkled
with perfume. Throughout the
length of the hall other tables extended,
and at these they found seats and food:
Syrian radishes, melons from the oases
near the Oxus, white olives from Bethany,
honey from Capharnahum, and the
little onions of Ascalon. There were candelabra
everywhere, liquids cooled with
snow, cheeses big as millstones, chunks
of fat in wooden bowls, and behind the
tables, slaves with copper platters. On
the platters were quarters of red beef,
breams swimming in grease, and sunbirds
with their plumage on. In the semicircular
gallery musicians played, three
notes, constantly repeated.
</p>

<p>
The tetrarch’s table was spread with a
<pb n="46"/><anchor id="Pg046"/>cloth of byssus striped with Laconian
green. On it were jars of murrha filled
with balsam, Sidonian goblets of colored
glass, jasper amphoræ, and water-melons
from Egypt. Before the procurator was
a dish of oysters, lampreys, and boned
barbels, mixed well together, flavored
with cinnamon and assafœtida; mashed
grasshoppers baked in saffron; and a
roasted boar, the legs curled inward, the
eyes half-closed. The emir ate abundantly
of heron’s eggs whipped with wine
into an amber foam. When his fingers
were soiled, he wiped them in the
curls of the beautiful boy who sat near
by.
</p>

<p>
The smell of food filled the hall,
mounted to the <anchor id="corr046"/><corr sic="roof">roof.</corr> The atmosphere
was that of a bath, and the wines were
heady. Already discussions had arisen.
A mountaineer and a Galilean skiffsman
had been dragged away, the one senseless,
the other with features indistinguishable
and masked in blood. It was
a great festival, and the tetrarch was entertaining,
as only he could, his friends,
<pb n="47"/><anchor id="Pg047"/>his enemies, and whoever chanced that
way.
</p>

<p>
<q>As a child he rubbed his body with
the leaves of the cnyza, which is a preservative
of chastity.</q> It was a little man
with restless eyes and a very long white
beard detailing the virtues of Iohanan.
<q>But,</q> he added, <q>he must have found
cold water better.</q>
</p>

<p>
His neighbors laughed. One pounded
the table.
</p>

<p>
<q>Jeshua—</q> he began, but everyone was
talking at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>Jeshua—</q> he continued; yet, as no
one would listen, he turned to a passing
eunuch and caught him by the arm—<q>Jeshua
does more; he works miracles,
and not with the cnyza either.</q>
</p>

<p>
The eunuch eluded him and escaped.
However, he would not be balked; he
stood up and, through the din, he shouted
at the little man:
</p>

<p>
<q>Baba Barbulah, I tell you he is the
Messiah!</q>
</p>

<p>
His voice was so loud it dominated the
hubbub, and suddenly the hubbub ceased.
</p>

<pb n="48"/><anchor id="Pg048"/>

<p>
From the dais Pontius Pilate listened
indifferently. Antipas held his hands
behind his ears that he might hear the
better. The emir paid no attention at
all. On his head was a conical turban;
about it were loops of sapphire and coils
of pearl. He wore a vest with scant
sleeves that reached to the knuckles, and
trousers that overhung the instep and fell
in wide wrinkles on his feet; both were
of leopard-skin. Over the vest was a
sleeveless tunic, clasped at the shoulders
and girt at the waist. His hair was long,
plentifully oiled; his beard was bushy,
blue-black, and specked with silver.
</p>

<p>
Mary had approached. From the lessening
waist to the slender feet her dress
opened at either side. Beneath was a
chemise of transparent Bactrianian tissue.
From girdle to armpits were little
clasps; on her ankles, bands; and above
the elbow, on her bare white arm, two
circlets of emeralds from the mines of
Djebel Zabur.
</p>

<p>
The emir spoke to her. She listened
with a glimpse of the most beautiful
<pb n="49"/><anchor id="Pg049"/>teeth in the world. He put out a hand
tentatively and touched her: the tissue of
her garment crackled and emitted sparks.
He raised a goblet to her. The wine it
held was yellower than the marigold.
She brushed it with her lips; he drank it
off, then, refreshed, he looked her up and
down.
</p>

<p>
In one hand she held a cup of horn,
narrower at the top than at the end; in
it were dice made of the knee-joints of
gazelles, and these she rattled in his
beard.
</p>

<p>
<q>That beautiful Sultan, will he play?</q>
</p>

<p>
With an ochre-tipped finger she pointed
at the turban on his head. The eyes of
the emir vacillated. He undid a string
of gems and placed them on the table’s
edge. Mary unclasped a coil of emeralds
and rattled the dice again. She
held the cup high up, then spilled the
contents out.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ashtaroth!</q> the emir cried. He had
won.
</p>

<p>
Mary leaned forward, fawned upon his
breast, and gazed into his face. Her
<pb n="50"/><anchor id="Pg050"/>breath had the fragrance of his own
oasis, her lips were moist as the pomegranate’s
pulp, her teeth as keen as his
own desire.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, beautiful Sultan, it is I.</q> With
the back of her hand she disturbed the
dice. <q>I am Ashtaroth, am I not?</q>
</p>

<p>
Questioningly the emir explored the
unfathomable eyes that gazed into his.
</p>

<p>
On their surface floated an acquiescence
to the tacit offer of his own. Then
he nodded, and Mary turned and gathered
the jewels from the cloth of byssus
where they lay.
</p>

<p>
<q>I tell you he is the Messiah!</q> It
was the angry disputant shouting at the
little man.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who is? What are you talking
about?</q>
</p>

<p>
Though the hubbub had ceased,
throughout the hall were the mutterings
of dogs disturbed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Jeshua,</q> the disputant answered;
<q>Jeshua the Nazarene.</q>
</p>

<p>
A Pharisee, very vexed, his bonnet
tottering, gnashed back: <q>The Messiah
<pb n="51"/><anchor id="Pg051"/>will uphold the law; this Nazarene attacks
it.</q>
</p>

<p>
A Scribe interrupted: <q>Many things
are to distinguish his advent. The light
of the sun will be increased a hundredfold,
the orchards will bear fruit a thousand
times more abundantly. Death will
be forgotten, joy will be universal, Elijah
will return.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But he has!</q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas started. The Scribe trembled
with rage. But the throng had caught
the name of Elijah, and knew to whom
the disputant referred—a man in tattered
furs whom a few hours before they had
seen dragged away by a negro naked to
the waist, and some one shouted:
</p>

<p>
<q>Iohanan is Elijah.</q>
</p>

<p>
Baba Barbulah stood up and turned to
whence the voice had come:
</p>

<p>
<q>In the footprints of the Anointed impudence
shall increase, and the face of
the generation shall be as the face of a
dog. It may be,</q> he added, significantly—<q>it
may be that you speak the truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
The sarcasm was lost. The musicians
<pb n="52"/><anchor id="Pg052"/>in the gallery, who had been playing
on flute and timbrel, began now on the
psalteron and the native sambuca. Behind
was a row of lute-players; but most
in view was a trignon, an immense Egyptian
harp, at which with nimble fingers a
fair girl plucked.
</p>

<p>
In the shadow Herodias leaned. At a
signal from her the musicians attacked
the prelude of a Syrian dance, and in the
midst of the assemblage a figure veiled
from head to foot suddenly appeared.
For a moment it stood very still; then
the veil fell of itself, and from the garrison
a shout went up:
</p>

<p>
<q>Salomè! Salomè!</q>
</p>

<p>
Her hair, after an archaic Chanaanite
fashion, was arranged in the form of a
tower. Her high bosom was wound
about with protecting bands. Her waist
was bare. She wore long pink drawers
of silk, and for girdle she had the blue
buds of the lotus, which are symbols of
virginity. She was young and exquisitely
formed. In her face you read strange
records, and on her lips were promises as
<pb n="53"/><anchor id="Pg053"/>rare. Her eyes were tortoise-shell, her
hair was black as guilt.
</p>

<p>
The prelude had ceased, the movement
quickened. With a gesture of abandonment
the girl threw her head back, and,
her arms extended, she fluttered like a
butterfly on a rose. She ran forward.
The sambuca rang quicker, the harp
quicker yet. She threw herself to one
side, then to the other, her hips swaying
as she moved. The buds at her girdle
fell one by one; she was dancing on
flowers, her hips still swaying, her waist
advancing and retreating to the shiver of
the harp. She was elusive as dream,
subtle as love; she intoxicated and entranced;
and finally, as she threw herself
on her hands, her feet, first in the air
and then slowly descending, touched the
ground, while her body straightened like
a reed, there was a long growl of unsatisfied
content.
</p>

<p>
She was kneeling now before the dais.
Pilate compared her to Bathylle, a mime
whom he had applauded at Rome. The
tetrarch was purple; he gnawed his
<pb n="54"/><anchor id="Pg054"/>under lip. For the moment he forgot
everything he should have remembered—the
presence of his guests, the stains
of his household, his wife even, whose
daughter this girl was—and in a gust of
passion he half rose from his couch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come to me,</q> he cried. <q>But come
to me, and ask whatever you will.</q>
</p>

<p>
Salomè hesitated and pouted, the point
of her tongue protruding between her
lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come to me,</q> he pleaded; <q>you shall
have slaves and palaces and cities; you
shall have hills and intervales. I will
give you anything; half my kingdom if
you wish.</q>
</p>

<p>
There was a tinkle of feet; the girl
had gone. In a moment she returned,
and balancing herself on one foot, she
lisped very sweetly: <q>I should like by
and by to have you give me the head of
Iohanan—</q> she looked about; in the
distance a eunuch was passing, a dish in
his hand, and she added, <q>on a platter.</q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas jumped as though a hound
under the table had bitten him on the
<pb n="55"/><anchor id="Pg055"/>leg. He turned to the procurator, who
regarded him indifferently, and to the
emir, who was toying with Mary’s agate-nailed
hand. He had given his word,
however; the people had heard. About
his ears the perspiration started; from
purple he had grown very gray.
</p>

<p>
Salomè still stood, balancing herself
on one foot, the point of her tongue just
visible, while from the gallery beyond, in
whose shadows he divined the instigating
presence of Herodias, came the grave
music of an Hebraic hymn.
</p>

<p>
<q>So be it,</q> he groaned.
</p>

<p>
The order was given, and a tear
trickled down through the paint and
furrows of his cheek. On the hall a
silence had descended. The guests were
waiting, and the throb of the harp accentuated
the suspense. Presently there
was the clatter of men-at-arms, and a
negro, naked to the waist, appeared, an
axe in one hand, the head of the prophet
in the other.
</p>

<p>
He presented it deferentially to Antipas,
who motioned it away, his face
<pb n="56"/><anchor id="Pg056"/>averted. Salomè smiled. She took it,
and then, while she resumed her veil, she
put it down before the emir, who eyed it
with the air of one that has seen many
another object such as that.
</p>

<p>
But in a moment the veil was adjusted,
and with the trophy the girl disappeared.
</p>

<p>
The harp meanwhile had ceased to
sob, the guests were departing; already
the procurator had gone. The emir
looked about for Mary, but she also had
departed; and, with the expectation, perhaps,
of finding her without, he too got
up and left the hall.
</p>

<p>
Antipas was alone. Through the lattice
at his side he could see the baaras
in the basalt emitting its firefly sparks of
flame. From an adjacent corridor came
the discreet click-clack of a sandal, and
in a moment the head of the prophet was
placed on the table at which he lay. The
tetrarch leaned over and gazed into the
unclosed eyes. They were haggard and
dilated, and they seemed to curse.
</p>

<p>
He put his hand to his face and tried
to think—to forget rather, and not to
re<pb n="57"/><anchor id="Pg057"/>member; but his ears were charged with
rustlings that extended indefinitely and
lost themselves in the future; his mind
peopled itself with phantoms of the past.
Perhaps he dozed a little. When he
looked up again the head was no longer
there, and he told himself that Herodias
had thrown it to the swine.
</p>

<pb n="58"/><anchor id="Pg058"/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="59"/><anchor id="Pg059"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg060"/>

<pb n="61"/><anchor id="Pg061"/>
<head rend="page-break-before: right">III.</head>

<p>
In the distance the white and yellow
limestone of the mountains rose. Near
by was a laughter of flowers, a tumult of
green. Just beyond, in a border of sedge
and rushes, a lake lay, a mirror to the
sky. In the background were the blue
and white terraces of Magdala, and about
a speaker were clustered a handful of
people, a group of laborers and of fishermen.
</p>

<p>
He was dressed as a rabbi, but he
looked like a seer. In his face was the
youth of the world, in his eyes the infinite.
As he spoke, his words thrilled and
his presence allured. <q>Repent,</q> he was
saying; <q>the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.</q> And as the resplendent prophecy
continued, you would have said that a
bird in his heart had burst into song.
</p>

<p>
A little to one side, in an attitude of
<pb n="62"/><anchor id="Pg062"/>amused contempt, a few of the tetrarch’s
courtiers stood; they were dressed in the
Roman fashion, and one, Pandera, a captain
of the guard, wore a cuirass that glittered
as he laughed. He was young and
very handsome. He had white teeth,
red lips, a fair skin, a dark beard, and,
as he happened to be stationed in the
provinces, an acquired sneer. Dear old
Rome, how vague it was! And as he jested
with his comrades he thought of its
delights, and wished himself either back
again in the haunts he loved, or else, if
he must be separated from them, then,
instead of vegetating in a tiresome tetrarchy,
he felt that it would be pleasant
to be far off somewhere, where the uncouth
Britons were, a land which it took
a year of adventures to reach; on the
banks of the Betis, whence the girls came
that charmed the lupanars; in Numidia,
where the hunting was good; or in Thrace,
where there was blood in plenty—anywhere,
in fact, save on the borders of the
beautiful lake where he happened to be.
</p>

<p>
It was but the restlessness of youth,
<pb n="63"/><anchor id="Pg063"/>perhaps, that disturbed him so, for in
Galilee there were oafs as awkward as
any that Britannia could show; there was
game in abundance; blood, too, was not
as infrequent as it might have been; and
as for women, there at his side stood one
as appetizing as Rome, Spain even, had
produced. He turned to her now, and
plucked at his dark beard and showed
his white teeth; he had caught a phrase
of the rabbi in which the latter had mentioned
the kingdoms of the earth, and the
phrase amused him.
</p>

<p>
<q>I like that,</q> he said. <q>What does
he know about the kingdoms of the
earth? Mary, I wager what you will
that he has never been two leagues from
where he stands. Let’s ask and see.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Mary did not seem to hear. She
was engrossed in the rabbi, and Pandera
had to tug at her sleeve before she consented
to return to a life in which he
seemingly had a part.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you say?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
Mary shook her head. She had the
air of one whose mind is elsewhere. Into
<pb n="64"/><anchor id="Pg064"/>her face a vacancy had come; she seemed
incapable of reply; and as the guardsman
scrutinized her it occurred to him that
she might be on the point of having an
attack of that catalepsy to which he knew
her to be subject. But immediately she
reassured him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come, let us go.</q>
</p>

<p>
And, the guardsman at her side, the
others in her train, she ascended the little
hill on which her castle was, and where
the midday meal awaited.
</p>

<p>
It was a charming residence. Built
quadrangularwise, the court held a fountain
which was serviceable to those that
wished to bathe. The roof was a garden.
The interior façade was of teak
wood, carved and colored; the frontal was
of stone. Seen from the exterior it looked
the fortress of some umbrageous prince,
but in the courtyard reigned the seduction
of a woman in love. From without
it menaced, within it soothed.
</p>

<p>
Her title to it was a matter of doubt.
According to Pandera, who at the mess-table
at Tiberias had boasted his
pos<pb n="65"/><anchor id="Pg065"/>session of her confidence, it was a heritage
from her father. Others declared
that it had been given her by her earliest
lover, an old man who since had passed
away. Yet, after all, no one cared. She
kept open house; the tetrarch held her
in high esteem; she was attached to the
person of the tetrarch’s wife; only a little
before, the emir of Tadmor had made a
circuitous journey to visit her; Vitellius,
the governor of the province, had stopped
time and again beneath her roof; and—and
here was the point—to see her was
to acquire a new conception of beauty.
Of human flowers she was the most fair.
</p>

<p>
Yet now, during the meal that followed,
Mary, the toast of the tetrarchy, she
whose wit and brilliance had been echoed
even in Rome, wrapped herself in a mantle
of silence. The guardsman jested in
vain. To the others she paid as much
attention as the sun does to a torch; and
when at last Pandera, annoyed, perhaps,
at her disregard of a quip of his, attempted
to whisper in her ear, she left the
room.
</p>

<pb n="66"/><anchor id="Pg066"/>

<p>
The nausea of the hour may have affected
her, for presently, as she threw herself
on her great couch, her thoughts forsook
the present and went back into the
past, her childhood returned, and faces
that she had loved reappeared and smiled.
Her father, for instance, Theudas, who
had been satrap of Syria, and her mother,
Eucharia, a descendant of former
kings.
</p>

<p>
But of these her memories were slight—they
had died when she was still very
young—and in their place came her sister,
Martha, kind of heart and quick of temper,
obdurate, indulgent, and continually
perplexed; Simon, Martha’s husband, a
Libyan, born in Cyrene, called by many
the Leper because of a former whiteness of
his skin, a whiteness which had long since
vanished, for he was brown as a date;
Eleazer, her brother, younger than herself,
a delicate boy with blue pathetic
eyes; and with them came the delight of
Bethany, that lovely village on the oriental
slope of the Mount of Olives,
where the rich of Jerusalem had their
<pb n="67"/><anchor id="Pg067"/>villas, and where her girlhood had been
passed.
</p>

<p>
From the lattice at which she used to
sit she could see the wide white road
begin its descent to the Jordan, a stretch
of almond trees and oleanders; and just
beyond, in a woody hollow, a little house
in which Sephôrah lived—a woman who
came from no one knew where, and to
whom Martha had forbidden her to speak.
</p>

<p>
She could see her still, a gaunt, gray
creature, with projecting cheek-bones, a
skin of brick, and a low, insinuating
voice. The fascination which she had exercised
over her partook both of wonder
and of fear, for it was rumored that she
was a sorceress, and as old as the world.
To Mary, who was then barely nubile,
and inquisitive as only fanciful children
are, she manifested a great affection, enticing
her to her dwelling with little
cakes that were sweet to the tooth and
fabulous tales that stirred the heart: the
story of Stratonice and Combabus, for
instance, which Mary did not in the least
<pb n="68"/><anchor id="Pg068"/>understand, but which seemed to her intensely
sad.
</p>

<p>
<q>And then what?</q> she would ask when
the tale was done; and the woman would
tell her of Ninus and Semiramis, of Sennachereb,
of Sardanapalus, Belsarazzur,
of Dagon, the fish-god of Philistia, by
whom Goliath swore and in whose temple
Samson died, or of Sargon, who, placed
by his mother in an ark of rushes, was
set adrift in the Euphrates, yet, happily
discovered by a water-carrier, afterwards
became a leader of men.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, that was Moses!</q> the child
would exclaim.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no,</q> the woman invariably answered,
<q>it was Sargon.</q>
</p>

<p>
But that which pleasured Mary more
highly even than these tales were the
legends of Hither Asia, the wonderlands
of Babylon, and particularly the story of
the creation, for always the human mind
has wished to read the book of God.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where did they say the world came
from?</q> she would ask.
</p>

<p>
And Sephôrah, drawing a long breath,
<pb n="69"/><anchor id="Pg069"/>would answer: <q rend="post: none">Once all was darkness
and water. In this chaos lived strange
animals, and men with two wings, and
others with four wings and two faces.
Some had the thighs of goats, some had
horns, and some had horses’ feet, or were
formed behind like a horse and in front
like a man; there were bulls with human
faces, and men with the heads of dogs,
and other animals of human shape with
fins like fishes, and fishes like sirens, and
dragons, and creeping things, and serpents,
and fierce creatures, the images of
which are preserved in the temple of Bel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Over all these ruled the great mother,
Um Uruk. But Bel, whom your people
call Baal, divided the darkness and clove
the woman asunder. Of one part he
made the earth, and of the other the sun,
the moon, the planets. He drew off the
water, apportioned it to the land, and
prepared and arranged the world. The
creatures on it could not endure the light
of day and became extinct.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Now when Bel saw the land fruitful
yet uninhabited, he cut off his head and
<pb n="70"/><anchor id="Pg070"/>made one of the gods mingle the blood
which flowed from it with earth and form
therewith men and animals that could
endure the sun. Presently Chaldæa was
plentifully populated, but the inhabitants
lived like animals, without order or rule.
Then there appeared to them from the
sea a monster of the name of Yan. Its
body was that of a fish, but under its
head another head was attached, and on
its fins were feet, and its voice was that
of a man. Its image is still preserved.
It came at morning, passed the day, and
taught language and science, the harvesting
of seeds and of fruits, the rules for
the boundaries of land, the mode of
building cities and temples, arts and
writing and all that pertains to civilized
life, and for four hundred and thirty-two
thousand years the world went very well.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Then in a dream Bel revealed to
Xisuthrus that there would be a great
storm, and men would be destroyed. He
bade him bury in Sepharvaim, the city of
the sun, all the ancient, mediæval, and
modern records, and build a ship and
<pb n="71"/><anchor id="Pg071"/>embark in it with his kindred and his
nearest friends. He was also to take
food and drink into the ship, and pairs
of all creatures winged and four-footed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Xisuthrus did as he was bidden, and
from the ends of heaven the storm began
to blow. Bin thundered; Nebo, the Revealer,
came forth; Nergal, the Destroyer,
overthrew; and Adar, the Sublime,
swept in his brightness across the earth.
The storm devoured the nations, it lapped
the sky, turned the land into an ocean,
and destroyed everything that lived. Even
the gods were afraid. They sought refuge
in the heaven of Anu, sovereign of the
upper realms. As hounds draw in their
tails, they seated themselves on their
thrones, and to them Mylitta, the great
goddess, spake: <q>The world has turned
from me, and ruin I have proclaimed.</q>
She wept, and the gods on their thrones
wept with her.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>On the seventh day Xisuthrus perceived
that the storm had abated and
that the sea had begun to fall. He sent
out a dove, it returned; next, a swallow,
<pb n="72"/><anchor id="Pg072"/>which also returned, but with mud on its
feet; and again, a raven, which saw the
corpses in the water and ate them, and
returned no more. Then the boat was
stayed and settled upon Mount Nasir.
Xisuthrus went out and worshipped the
recovered earth. When his companions
went in search of him he had disappeared,
but his voice called to them saying that
for his piety he had been carried away;
that he was dwelling among the gods;
and that they were to return to Sepharvaim
and dig up the books and give them
to mankind. Which they did, and erected
many cities and temples, and rebuilt
Babylon and Mylitta’s shrine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is simpler in Genesis,</q> Mary said,
the first time she heard this marvellous
tale. For to her, as to Martha and Eleazer,
the khazzan, the teacher of the synagogue,
had read from the great square
letters in which the Pentateuch was written
another account of the commingling
of Chaos and of Light.
</p>

<p>
At the mention of the sacred canon,
Sephôrah would smile with that
indul<pb n="73"/><anchor id="Pg073"/>gence which wisdom brings, and smooth
her scanty plaits, and draw the back of
her hand across her mouth.
</p>

<p>
<q>Burned on tiles in the land of the
magi are the records of a million years.
In the unpolluted tombs of Osorapi the
history of life and of time is written on
the cerements of kings. Where the bells
ring at the neck of the camels of Iran
is a stretch of columns on which are inscribed
the words of those that lived in
Paradise. On a wall of the temple of
Bel are the chronicles of creation; in the
palace of Assurbanipal, the narrative of
the flood. It is from these lands and
monuments the Thorah comes; its verses
are made of their memories; it gathered
whatever it found, and overlooked the
essential, immortal life.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Sephôrah added in a whisper,
<q>For we are descended from gods, and
immortal as they.</q>
</p>

<p>
The khazzan had disclosed to Mary
no such prospect as that. To him as to
all orthodox expounders of the Law man
was essentially evanescent; he lived his
<pb n="74"/><anchor id="Pg074"/>
    little day and disappeared forever. God
    alone was immortal, and an immortal being
    would be God. The contrary beliefs
    of the Egyptians and the Aryans were to
    them abominations, and the spiritualistic
    doctrine inaugurated by Juda Maccabæus
    and accepted by the Pharisees, an
    impiety. The Pentateuch had not a word
    on the subject. Moses had expressly declared
    that secret things belong to the
    Lord, and only visible things to man.
    The prophets had indeed foretold a terrestrial
    immortality, but that immortality
    was the immortality of a nation; and the
    realization of their prophecy the entire
    people awaited. Apart from that there
    was only Sheol, a sombre region of the
    under-earth, to which the dead descended,
    and there remained without consciousness,
    abandoned by God.
    </p><p>
    <q>Immortal!</q> Mary, with great wondering
    eyes, would echo. <q>Immortal!</q>
    </p><p>
    <q>Yes; but to become so,</q> Sephôrah
    replied, <q>you must worship at another
    shrine.</q>
    </p><p>
    <q>Where is it?</q>
</p>

<pb n="75"/><anchor id="Pg075"/>

<p>
Sephôrah answered evasively. Mary
would find it in time—when the spring
came, perhaps; and meanwhile she had
a word or two to say of Baal to such effect
even that Mary questioned the khazzan.
</p>

<p>
<q>However great the god of the Gentiles
has been imagined,</q> the khazzan
announced, <q>he is bounded by the earth
and the sky. His feet may touch the
one, his head the other, but of nature he
is a part, and, to the Eternal, nature is not
even a garment, it is a substance He
made, and which He can remould at will.
It is not in nature, it is in light, He is:
in the burning bush in which He revealed
Himself; in the stake at which Isaac
would have died; in the lightning in which
the Law was declared, the column of fire,
the flame of the sacrifices, and the gleaming
throne in which Isaiah saw Him sit—it
is there that He is, and His shadow is
the sun.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of this Mary repeated the substance
to her friend, and Sephôrah mused.
</p>

<p>
<q>No,</q> she said at last—<q>no, he is not
<pb n="76"/><anchor id="Pg076"/>in light, but in the desert where nature is
absent, and where the world has ceased
to be. The threats of a land that never
smiled are reflected in his face. The
sight of him is death. No, Baal is the
sun-god. His eyes fecundate.</q>
</p>

<p>
And during the succeeding months
Sephôrah entertained Mary with Assyrian
annals and Egyptian lore. She told
her more of Baal, whose temple was in
Babylon, and of Baaltis, who reigned at
Ascalon. She told her of the women who
wept for Tammuz, and explained the reason
of their tears. She told her of the
union of Ptah, the unbegotten begetter
of the first beginning, and of Neith,
mother of the sun; of the holy incest of
Isis and Osiris; and of Luz, called by the
patriarchs Bethel, the House of God, the
foothold of a straight stairway which
messengers ceaselessly ascended and descended,
and at whose summit the Elohim
sat.
</p>

<p>
She told her of these things, of others
as well; and now and then in the telling
of them a fat little man with beady eyes
<pb n="77"/><anchor id="Pg077"/>would wander in, the smell of garlic
about him, and stare at Mary’s lips. His
name was Pappus; by Sephôrah he was
treated with great respect, and Mary
learned that he was rich and knew that
Sephôrah was poor.
</p>

<p>
When the Passover had come and gone,
Sephôrah detected that Mary had ceased
to be a child; and of the gods and goddesses
with whose adventures she was
wont to entertain her, gradually she confined
herself to Mylitta; and in describing
the wonderlands which she knew so well,
she spoke now only of Babylon, where
the great tower was, and the gardens that
hung in the air.
</p>

<p>
It was all very marvellous and beautiful,
and Sephôrah described it in fitting
terms. There was the Temple of the Seven
Spheres, where the priests offered incense
to the Houses of the Planets, to the
whole host of heaven, and to Bel, Lord
of the Sky. There was the Home of the
Height, a sheer flight of solid masonry
extending vertiginously, and surmounted
by turrets of copper capped with gold.
<pb n="78"/><anchor id="Pg078"/>In its utmost pinnacle were a sanctuary
and a dazzling couch. There the priests
said that sometimes Bel came and rested.
For the truth of that statement, however,
Sephôrah declined to vouch. She had
never seen him; but the hanging gardens
she had seen, long before they were demolished.
She had walked in them, and
she described their loveliness, and related
that they were erected to pleasure a Persian
princess whose eyes had wearied of
the monotony of the Babylonian plain.
</p>

<p>
Once when Pappus was present—and
latterly he had been often there—she
passed from the gardens to the grove
where the temple of Mylitta stood. At
the steps of the shrine, she declared, were
white-winged lions, and immense bulls
with human heads. Within were dovecotes
and cisterns, the emblems of fecundity,
and a block of stone which she did
not describe. Without, among the terebinths
and evergreens, were little cabins
and an avenue bordered by cypress trees,
in which men with pointed hats and long
embroidered gowns passed slowly, for
<pb n="79"/><anchor id="Pg079"/>there the maidens of Babylon sat, chapleted
with cords, burning bran for perfume,
awaiting the will of the first who
should toss a coin in their lap and in
the name of Mylitta invite them to perform
the sacred rite.
</p>

<p>
<q>That,</q> said Sephôrah, <q>is the worship
Mylitta exacts.</q> As she spoke she
drew herself up, her height increased,
an unnatural splendor filled her eyes.
<q>I,</q> she continued, <q>am her priestess.
I sacrificed at Byblus, but you may sacrifice
here. There is a dovecote, yonder
is a cistern, beyond are the cypress and
the evergreens that she loves. Mary, do
you wish to be immortal? Do you see
the way?</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary smiled vaguely, and with the
serenity of one worshipping a divinity
she suffered the fat Jerusalemite to take
her in his arms.
</p>

<p>
And now as she lay on her great couch
these things returned to her, and subsequent
episodes as well. There had
been the lamentable grief of Martha, the
added pathos in her brother’s eyes. The
<pb n="80"/><anchor id="Pg080"/>estate of her father had been divided,
and the castle of Magdala had fallen to
her share. Meanwhile she had been at
Jerusalem, and from there she had
journeyed to Antioch, where she had
heard the beasts roar in the arena.
She had looked on blood, on the honey-colored
moon that effaced the stars,
and everywhere she had encountered
love.
</p>

<p>
Since then her hours had been grooved
in revolving circles of alternating delights,
and delights to which no shadow
of regret had come. To her, youth had
been a chalice of aromatic wine. She
had drained it and found no dregs.
Day had been interwoven with splendors,
and night with the rays of the sun.
Where she passed she conquered; when
she smiled there were slaves ready-made.
There had been hot brawls where she
trod, the gleam of white knives. Men
had killed each other because of her
eyes, and women had wept themselves
to death. For her a priest had gone
mad, and a betrothed had hid herself
<pb n="81"/><anchor id="Pg081"/>in the sea. In Hierapolis the galli had
fancied her Ashtaroth; and at Capri,
where Tiberius lounged, a villa awaited
her will.
</p>

<p>
Her life had indeed been full, yet that
morning its nausea had mounted to her
heart. At the words of the rabbi the
horizon had expanded, the dream of immortality
returned. It had been forgot
long since and abandoned, but now, for
the first time since her childhood, something
there was which admonished her
that perhaps she still might stroll through
lands where dreams come true. The
path was not wholly clear as yet, and as
in her troubled mind she tried to disentangle
the past from the present the
sun went down behind the castle, the
crouching shadows elongated and possessed
the walls.
</p>

<p>
An echo came to her, Repent, and the
prophecy continuing danced in her ears;
yet still the way was obscure. In the
echo she divined merely that the past
must be put from her like a garment
that is stained. The rest was vague.
<pb n="82"/><anchor id="Pg082"/>Then suddenly she was back again in
Machærus, and she heard the ringing
words of John. Could this be the Messiah
her nation awaited? was there a
kingdom coming, and immortality too?
</p>

<p>
Her thoughts entangled and grew confused.
There was a murmur of harps in
the distance, and she wondered whence
it could come. Some one was speaking;
she tried to rouse herself and listen.
The room was filled with bats that
changed to butterflies. The murmur of
harps continued, and through the wall
before her issued a litter in which a
woman lay.
</p>

<p>
A circle of slaves surrounded her.
She was pale, and her eyes closed languorously.
<q>I am Indolence,</q> she said.
<q>Sleep is not softer than my couch.
My lightest wish is law to kings. I live
on perfumes; my days are as shadows
on glass. Mary, come with me, and I will
teach you to forget.</q>
</p>

<p>
She vanished, and where the litter
had been stood a eunuch. <q>I am Envy,</q>
he said, and his eyes drooped sullenly.
<pb n="83"/><anchor id="Pg083"/><q>I separate those that love; I dismantle
altars and dismember nations. I corrode
and corrupt; I destroy, and I never
rebuild. My joy is malice, and my creed
false-witnessing. Mary, come with me,
and you will learn to hate.</q>
</p>

<p>
He disappeared, and where his slime
had dripped stood a being with fingers
intertwisted and a back that bent. <q>I
am Greed,</q> it said. <q>I sap the veins of
youth; I drain the hearts of women; I
bring contention where peace should be.
I make fathers destroy their sons, and
daughters betray their mother. I never
forget, and I never release. I am the
master. Mary, come with me, and you
shall own the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
The fetor of the presence went, and in
its place came one whose footsteps thundered.
<q>I am Anger,</q> he declared. <q>I
exterminate and rejoice. I batten on
blood. In my heart is suspicion, in my
hand is flame. It is I that am war and
disaster and regret. My breath consumes,
and my voice affrights. Mary, come with
me, and you will learn to quell.</q>
</p>

<pb n="84"/><anchor id="Pg084"/>

<p>
He dissolved, and in the shadows stood
one whose hands were ample, and whose
wide mouth laughed. <q>I am Gluttony,</q>
he announced, and as he spoke his voice
was thick. <q>I fatten and forsake. I offer
satrapies for one new dish. I invite and
alienate, I welcome and repel. It is I
that bring disease and disorders. I am
the harbinger of Death. Mary, come with
me, and you shall taste of Life.</q>
</p>

<p>
He also disappeared, and two heralds
entered with trumpets on which they
blew, and one exclaimed, <q>Make way for
Assurbanipal, ruler of land and of sea.</q>
Then, with horsemen riding royally,
Sardanapalus advanced through the fissure
in the wall. On his head a high
and wonderful tiara shone with zebras
that had wings and horns. His hair was
long, and his beard curled in overlapping
rings. His robe dazzled, and the
close sleeves were fastened over his
knuckles with bracelets of precious stones.
In one hand he held a sceptre, in the
other a chart.
</p>

<p>
<q>I,</q> he cried—<q>I am Assurbanipal;
<pb n="85"/><anchor id="Pg085"/>the progeny of Assur and of Baaltis, son
of the great king Riduti, whom the
lord of crowns, in days remote prophesying
in his name, raised to the kingdom,
and in the womb of his mother created
to rule. The man of war, the joy of Assur
and of Istar, the royal offspring, am I.
When the gods seated me on the throne
of the father my begetter, Bin poured
down his rain, Hea feasted the people.
My enemies I destroyed, and their gods
glorified me before my camp. The god
of their oracles, whose image no man had
seen, I took, and the goddesses whom
the kings worshipped I dishonored.</q>
</p>

<p>
He paused and looked proudly about,
then he continued:
</p>

<p>
<q>That which is in the storehouse of
heaven is kindled, and to the city of cities
my glory flies. The queens above and
below proclaim my glory. I am Glory,
and I am Pride. Mary, come with me,
and you shall disdain the sky.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Mary gave no sign. The clattering
horses vanished, and two men dressed in
<pb n="86"/><anchor id="Pg086"/>women’s clothes appeared. They bowed
to the ground and chanted:
</p>

<p>
<q>The holy goddess, our Lady Mylitta,
whose sacrificants we are.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then came a form so luminous that
Mary hid her face and listened merely.
</p>

<p>
<q>I,</q> said a voice—<q>I am Desire. In
Greece I am revered, and there I am
Aphrodite. In Italy I am Venus; in
Egypt, Hathor; in Armenia, Anaitis; in
Persia, Anâhita; Tanit in Carthage;
Baaltis in Byblus; Derceto in Ascalon;
Atargatis in Hierapolis; Bilet in Babylon;
Ashtaroth to the Sidonians; and Aschera
in the glades of Judæa. And everywhere
I am worshipped, and everywhere
I am Love. I bring joy and torture, delight
and pain. I appease and appal.
It is I that create and undo. It is I that
make heaven and people hell. I am the
mistress of the world. Without me time
would cease to be. I am the germ of
stars, the essence of things. I am all
that is, will be, and has been, and my robe
no mortal has raised. I breathe, and nations
are; in my parturitions are planets;
<pb n="87"/><anchor id="Pg087"/>my home is space. My lips are blissfuller
than any bloom of bliss; my arms
the opening gates of life. The Infinite is
mine. Mary, come with me, and you shall
measure it.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Mary ventured to look again the
vision had gone. They had all gone now.
She had made no effort to detain them.
They were tempters of which she was
freed, in which she believed, and which
were real to her. The wall through which
they had come and departed was vague
and in the darkness remote, but presently
it dissolved again, and afar in the beckoning
distance was one breathing a soul into
decrepit rites. <q>Come unto me, all ye that
sorrow and are heavy-laden,</q> she heard
him say; and, as with a great sob of joy
she rose to that gracious summons, night
seized her. When she awoke, a newer
dawn had come.
</p>

<pb n="88"/><anchor id="Pg088"/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="89"/><anchor id="Pg089"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg090"/>

<pb n="91"/><anchor id="Pg091"/>
<head rend="page-break-before: right">IV.</head>

<p>
In the gardens of the palace the tetrarch
mused. The green parasols of the
palms formed an avenue, and down that
avenue now and then he looked. Near
him a Syrian bear, quite tame, with a
sweet face and tufted silver fur, gambolled
prodigiously. Up and down a neighboring
tree two lemurs chased with that
grace and diabolic vivacity which those enchanting
animals alone possess. Ringed-horned
antelopes, the ankles slender as
the stylus, the eyes timid and trustful,
pastured just beyond; and there too a
black-faced ape, irritated perhaps by the
lemurs, turned indignant somersaults, the
tender coloring of his body glistening in
the sun.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is odd that Pahul does not return,</q>
the tetrarch reflected; and then, it may be
for consolation’s sake, he plunged his face
<pb n="92"/><anchor id="Pg092"/>in a jar of wine that had been drained, in
accordance with a recipe of Vitellius,
through cinnamon and calamus, and drank
abundantly.
</p>

<p>
Long since he had deserted Machærus.
The legends that peopled its corridors
had beset him with a sense of reality
which before they had never possessed.
The leaves of the baaras glittered frenetically
in the basalt, and in their spectral
light a phantom with eyes that cursed
came and went. At night he had drunk,
and in the clear forenoons he paced the
terrace fancying always that there, beyond
in the desert, Aretas prowled like a
wolf. Machærus was unhealthy; men had
gone mad there, others had disappeared
entirely. It was a haunt of echoes, of
memories, of ghosts also, perhaps too of
reproach. And so, with his court, he returned
to his brand-new Tiberias, where
the air was serener, and nature laughed.
</p>

<p>
And yet in the gardens that leaned to
the lake the tranquillity he had anticipated
eluded and declined to be detained.
Rumors that Herodias collected came to
<pb n="93"/><anchor id="Pg093"/>him with the stamp of Rome. One of his
brothers was plotting against him; another,
though in exile, was plotting too.
It was the Herod blood, his wife said;
and, with the intemperance of a woman
whose ambition has been deceived, she
taunted him with his plebeian descent.
<q>Your grandfather was a sweep at Ascalon,
a eunuch at that,</q> she had remarked;
and the tetrarch, by way of
reply, had been obliged to content himself
by asking how, in that case, he could
have been grandfather at all.
</p>

<p>
But latterly a new source of inquietude
had come. At Magdala, Capharnahum,
Bethsaïda, there, within the throw of a
stone, was a Nazarene going about inciting
the peasants to revolt. It was very vexatious,
and he told himself that when an
annoyance fades another appears. Life,
it occurred to him, was a brier with renascent
thorns. And now, as he gargled
the wine that left a pink foam on his
lips, even that irritation lapsed in the
perplexing absence of Pahul.
</p>

<p>
Pahul was a butler of his, a Greek
<pb n="94"/><anchor id="Pg094"/>whom he had picked up one adventurous
night in Rome, who had made himself
useful, whom he had attached to his
household, whom he consulted, and on
whom he relied. Early that day he had
sent him off with instructions to run the
demagogue to earth, to listen, to question
if need were, and to hurry back and report.
But as yet he had not returned.
The day was fading, and on the amphitheatre
which the hills made the sun seemed
to balance itself, the disk blood-red. The
lemurs had tired, perhaps; their yellow
eyes and circled tails had gone; the bear
had been led away; only the multicolored
ape remained, gnawing now with little
plaintive moans at a bit of fruit which he
held suspiciously in his wrinkled hand.
</p>

<p>
Presently a star appeared and quivered,
then another came, and though overhead
were streaks of pink, and, where the
sun had been, a violence of red and orange,
the east retained its cobalt, night
still was remote—an echo of crotals from
the neighboring faubourg, the cry of
<pb n="95"/><anchor id="Pg095"/>elephants impatient for their fodder,
alone indicating that a day was dead.
</p>

<p>
In the charm of the encroaching twilight
the irritation of the tetrarch waned and
decreased. He lost himself in memories
of the princess who had been his bride,
and he wondered were it possible that,
despite the irrevocable, he was never to
see, to speak, to hold her to him again.
Truly her grievance was unmeasurable,
the more so even that she had not deigned
to utter so much as a reproach. At the
rumor of his treachery she had betaken
herself to the solitudes, where Aretas her
father was king, and had there remained
girt in that unmurmuring silence which
nobility raises as a barrier between outrage
and itself, and which the desert is
alone competent to suggest.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is he!</q>
</p>

<p>
The tetrarch started so abruptly that
he narrowly missed the jar at his side.
On noiseless sandals Pahul had approached,
and stood before him nodding
his head with an air of assured conviction.
<pb n="96"/><anchor id="Pg096"/>The ape had fled and a stork stepped
gingerly away.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is he,</q> the Greek repeated—<q>John
the Baptist.</q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas plucked at his beard. <q>But
he is dead,</q> he gasped; <q>I beheaded him.
What nonsense you talk!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is he, I tell you, only grown younger.
I found him in the synagogue.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Where? what synagogue?</q>
</p>

<p>
Pahul made a gesture. <q>At Capharnahum,</q>
he answered, and gazed in
the tetrarch’s face. He was slight of form
and regular of feature. As a lad he had
crossed bare-handed from Cumæ to Rhegium,
and from there drifted to Rome,
where he started a commerce in Bœtican
girls which had so far prospered that he
bought two vessels to carry the freight.
Unfortunately the vessels met in a storm
and sank. Then he became a hanger-on
of the circus; in idle moments a tout. It
was in the latter capacity that Antipas
met him, and, pleased with his shrewdness
and perfect corruption, had attached him
to his house. This had occurred in years
<pb n="97"/><anchor id="Pg097"/>previous, and as yet Antipas had found
no cause to regret the trust imposed. He
was a useful braggart, idle, familiar, and
discreet; and he had acquired the dialect
of the country with surprising ease.
</p>

<p>
<q>There were any number of people,</q>
Pahul continued. <q>Some said he was
the son of Joseph, the son of——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But he, what did he say? How tiresome
you are!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> And Pahul swung his arms.
<q>Who is Mammon?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Mammon? Mammon? How do I
know? Plutus, I suppose. What about
him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And who is Satan?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Satan? Satan is a—He’s a Jew
god. Why? But what do you mean by
asking me questions?</q>
</p>

<p>
Pahul nodded absently. <q>I heard him
say,</q> he continued, <q>that no man could
serve God and Mammon. At first I
thought he meant you. It was this way.
I got into conversation with a friend of
his, a man named Judas. He told me any
<pb n="98"/><anchor id="Pg098"/>number of things about him, that he cured
the sick——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Bah! Some Greek physician.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That he walks on the sea——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nonsense!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That he turns water into wine, feeds
the multitude, raises the dead——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Raises the dead!</q> And the tetrarch
added in the <hi rend="italic">sotto voce</hi> of thought, <q>So
did Elijah.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That he had been in the desert——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>With Aretas?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No; I questioned him on that point.
He had never heard of Aretas, but he said
that in the desert this Satan had come
and offered him—what do you suppose?
<hi rend="italic">The empire of the earth!</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas shook with fright. <q>It must
have been Aretas.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But that he had refused.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then it is John.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There, you see.</q> And Pahul dandled
himself with the air of one who is master
of logic. <q>That’s what I said myself. I
said this: <q>If he can raise the dead, he
can raise himself.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n="99"/><anchor id="Pg099"/>

<p>
<q>It <hi rend="italic">is</hi> John,</q> the tetrarch repeated.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am sure of it,</q> the butler continued.
<q>But he did not say so. Judas didn’t
either. On the contrary, he declared he
was not. He said John was not good
enough to carry his shoes. I saw through
that, though,</q> and Pahul leered; <q>he knew
whom I was, and he lied to protect his
friend. I of course pretended to believe
him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite right,</q> said the tetrarch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I played the fool. H’m, where
was I? Oh, I asked Judas who then
his friend was, but he went over to where
a woman stood; he spoke to her; she
moved away. Some of the others seemed
to reprove him. I would have followed,
but at that moment his friend stood up;
a khazzan offered him a scroll, but he
waved it aside; then some one asked him
a question which I did not catch; another
spoke to him; a third interrupted; he
seemed to be arguing with them. I was
too far away to hear well, and I got nearer;
then I heard him say, <q>I am the bread of
life.</q> Now, what did he mean by that?</q>
</p>

<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>

<p>
Antipas had no explanation to offer.
</p>

<p>
<q>Then,</q> Pahul continued, <q>he said he
had come down from heaven. A man
near me exclaimed, <q>He is the Messiah;</q>
but others——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Messiah!</q> echoed the tetrarch.
For a moment his thoughts stammered,
then at once he was back in the citadel.
On one side was the procurator, on the
other the emir of Tadmor. In front of
him was a drunken rabble, wrangling
Pharisees, and one man dominating the
din with an announcement of the Messiah’s
approach. The murmur of lutes
threaded through it all; and now, as his
thoughts deviated, he wondered could that
announcement have been the truth.
</p>

<p>
<q>But others,</q> Pahul continued, <q>objected
loudly. For a little I could not
catch a word. At last they became quieter,
and I heard him repeat that he was the
bread of life, adding, <q>Your fathers ate
manna and are dead, but this bread a
man may eat of and never die.</q> At this
there was new contention. A woman
fainted—the one to whom Judas had
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>spoken. They carried her out. As she
passed I could see her face. It was
Mary of Magdala. Judas held her by
the waist, another her feet.</q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas drew a hand across his face.
<q>It is impossible,</q> he muttered.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not impossible at all. I saw her as
plainly as I see you. The man next to
me said that the Rabbi had cast from her
seven devils. Moreover, Johanna was
there—yes, yes, the wife of Khuza, your
steward; it was she, I remember now, who
had her by the feet. And there were
others that I recognized, and others that
the man next to me pointed out: Zabdia,
a well-to-do fisherman whom I have
seen time and again, and with him his
sons James and John, and Salomè his
wife. Then, too, there were Simon Barjona
and Andrew his brother. Simon
had his wife with him, his children, and
his mother-in-law. The man next to me
said that the Rabbi called James and
John the Sons of Thunder, and Simon a
stone. There was Mathias the tax-gatherer,
Philip of Bethsaïda, Joseph
Bar<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>saba, Mary Clopas, Susannah, Nathaniel
of Cana, Thomas, Thaddeus, Aristian the
custom-house officer, Ruth the tax-gatherer’s
wife, mechanics from Scythopolis,
and Scribes from Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
The fingers of Antipas’ hand glittered
with jewels. He played with them nervously.
The sky seemed immeasurably
distant. For some little time it had been
hesitating between different shades of
blue, but now it chose a fathomless
indigo; Night unloosed her draperies,
and, with the prodigality of a queen who
reigns only when she falls, flung out upon
them uncounted stars.
</p>

<p>
Pahul continued: <q>And many of them
seemed to be at odds with each other.
They wrangled so that often I could not
distinguish a word. Some of them left
the synagogue. The Rabbi himself must
have been vexed, for in a lull I heard him
say to those who were nearest, <q>Will you
also go away?</q> Judas came in at that
moment, and he turned to him: <q>Have I
not chosen twelve, and is not one of you a
devil?</q> Judas came forward at once and
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>protested. I could see he was in earnest,
and meant what he said. The man next
told me that he was devoted to the Rabbi.
Then Simon Barjona, in answer to his
question, called out, <q>To whom should we
go? Thou art Christ, the Son of God.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas had ceased to listen. At the
mention of the Messiah the dream of
Israel had returned, and with it the pageants
of its faith unrolled.
</p>

<p>
Behind the confines of history, in the
naked desert he saw a bedouin, austere
and grandiose, preparing the tenets of a
nation’s creed; in the remoter past a
shadow in which there was lightning, then
the splendor of that first dawn where the
future opened like a book, and in the
grammar of the Eternal the promise of an
age of gold.
</p>

<p>
Through the echo of succeeding generations
came the rumor of that initial impulse
which drew the world in its flight.
The bedouin had put the desert behind
him, and stared at another. Where the
sand had been was the sea. As he passed,
the land leapt into life. There were
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>tents and passions, clans not men, an aggregate
of forces in which the unit disappeared.
For chieftain there was Might;
and above, the subjects of impersonal
verbs, the Elohim from whom the thunder
came, the rain, light and darkness, death
and birth, dream too, and nightmare as
well. The clans migrated. Goshen
called. In its heart Chaldæa spoke. The
Elohim vanished, and there was El, the
one great god, and Isra-el, the great
god’s elect. From heights that lost themselves
in immensity the ineffable name,
incommunicable and never to be pronounced,
was seared by forked flames on
a tablet of stone. A nation learned that
El was Jehovah, that they were in his
charge, that he was omnipotent, and that
the world was theirs.
</p>

<p>
They had a law, a covenant, a future,
and a god; and as they passed into the
lands of the well-beloved, leaving tombs
and altars to mark their passage, they had
battle-cries that frightened and hymns
that exalted the heart. Above were the
jealous eyes of Jehovah, and beyond
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>was the resplendent to-morrow. They
ravaged the land like hailstones. They
had the whirlwind for ally; the moon was
their servant; and to aid them the sun
stood still. The terror of Sinai gleamed
from their breastplates; men could not
see their faces and live. They encroached
and conquered. They had a home, they
made a capitol, and there on a rock-bound
hill Antipas saw David founding a line of
kings, and Solomon the city of god.
</p>

<p>
It was in their loins the Messiah was;
in them the apex of a nation’s prosperity;
in them glory at its apogee. And across
that tableau of might, of splendor, and
of submission for one second flitted the
silhouette of that dainty princess of
Utopia, the Queen of Sheba, bringing
riddles, romance, and riches to the wise
young king.
</p>

<p>
She must have been very beautiful,
Antipas with melancholy retrospection
reflected; and he fancied her more luminous
than the twelve signs of the zodiac,
lounging nonchalantly in a palanquin that
a white elephant with swaying tail
bal<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>anced on his painted back. And even as
she returned, with a child perhaps, to the
griffons of the fabulous Yemen whence
she came, Antipas noted a speck on the
horizon that grew from minim into
mountain, and obscured the entire sky.
He saw the empire split in twain, and in
the twin halves that formed the perfect
whole, a concussion of armies, brothers
appealing against their kin, the flight of
the Ideal.
</p>

<p>
Unsummoned before him paraded the
regicides, convulsions, and anarchies that
deified Hatred until Vengeance incarnate
talked Assyrian, and Nebuchadnezzar
loomed above the desert beyond. His
statue filled the perspective. With one
broad hand he overturned Jerusalem; with
another he swept a nation into captivity,
leaving in derision a pigmy for King of
Solitude behind, and, blowing the Jews
into Babylon, there retained them until
it occurred to Cyrus to change the Euphrates’
course.
</p>

<p>
By the light of that legend Antipas saw
an immense hall, illuminated by the seven
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>branches of countless candelabra, and
filled with revellers celebrating a monarch’s
feast. Beyond, through retreating
columns, were cyclopean arches and towers
whose summits were lost in clouds that
the lightning rent. At the royal table sat
Belsarazzur, laughing mightily at the enterprise
of the Persian king; about him
were the grandees of his court, the flower
of his concubines; at his side were the
sacred vases filled with wine. He raised
one to his lips, and there on the frieze
before him leapt out the flaming letters
of his doom, while to the trumpetings of
heralds Cyrus and his army beat down
the city’s gates.
</p>

<p>
It passed, and Antipas saw Jerusalem
repeopled, the Temple rebuilt, peace after
exile, the joy of bondage unloosed. For
a moment it lasted—a century or two at
most; and after Alexander, in chasing
kings hither and thither, had passed with
his huntsmen that way, Isis and Osiris
beckoned, and the descendants of the bedouin
belonged to Goshen again, and so remained
until Syria took them, lost them,
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>reconquered them, and might have done
with them utterly had not Juda Maccabæus
flaunted his banner, and the Roman
eagles pounced upon their prey. Once
more the Temple was rebuilt, <anchor id="corr108"/><corr sic="surperber">superber</corr>
than ever, and from the throne of David,
Antipas saw the upstart that was his
father rule Judæa.
</p>

<p>
With him the panorama and the kaleidoscope
of its details abruptly ceased.
But through it all the voices of the
prophets had rung more insistently with
each defeat. The covenant in the wilderness
was unforgetable; in the chained
links of slavery they saw the steps of a
throne, the triumph of truth over error,
peace over war, Israel pontiff and shepherd
of the nations of the world.
</p>

<p>
The expectation of a liberator who
should free the bonds of a people and
definitively re-create the land of the elect
possessed them utterly; his advent had
been constantly awaited, obstinately proclaimed;
the faith in him was unshakeable.
Palestine was filled with believers
praying the Eternal not to let them die
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>before the promise was fulfilled; the atmosphere
itself was charged with expectation.
</p>

<p>
And as the visions rushed through his
mind, Antipas fell to wondering whether
that covenant was as meaningless as he
had thought, or whether by any chance
this rabbi who had been arguing at Capharnahum
could be the usher of Israel’s
hope. If he were, then indeed he might
say good-bye to his tetrarchy, to his
dream of a kingdom as well.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> Pahul repeated, <q>the Son of
God!</q>
</p>

<p>
Antipas had been so far away that now
he started as one does whom the touch of
a hand awakes. To recover himself he
leaned over and plunged his face in the
jar. The wine brought him courage.
</p>

<p>
He must be suppressed, he decided.
</p>

<p>
<q>But,</q> the butler continued, <q>I——</q>
</p>

<p>
The frontal of the palace was set with
lights. The parasols of the palms had
turned from green to black, the stars
seemed remoter, the sky more dark.
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>From beyond came the call and answer of
the sentinels.
</p>

<p>
Antipas stood up. A fringe of his tunic
was detained by a rivet of the bench on
which he had sat; he stooped to loose it;
something moist touched his fingers, and
as he moved to the palace the black-faced
ape sprang at his side and nibbled at the
jewels on his hand.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg112"/>

<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
<head rend="page-break-before: right">V.</head>

<p>
The house of Simon Barlevi was gray,
and in shape an oblong. It had a flat
roof laid with a plaster of lime, about
which was a fretwork of open tiles. Beneath,
for doorway, was a recess, surmounted
by an arch and covered with a
layer of mud. On each side was a room.
</p>

<p>
In the recess, sheltered from the sun
and visited by the breeze, Simon stood.
His garments were white, and where they
were not they had been neatly chalked.
On the border of his skirt and sleeves
were the regulation fringes, and on his
forehead and about his left arm the phylacteries
which Pharisees affect. He was
not pleasant to the eye, but he was virtuous
and a strict observer of the Law.
</p>

<p>
In the room at his left were mats and
painted stools, set in the manner customary
when guests are awaited. For on
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>that day Simon Barlevi was to give a
little feast, to which he had bidden his
friends and also a rabbi whom he had
listened to in the synagogue, and with
whose ideas he did not at all agree.
Save for the mats and stools, and a lamp
of red clay, the room was bare.
</p>

<p>
In front of the house was a bit of
ground enclosed by a hedge of stones;
and now as Simon stood in the recess a
guest appeared.
</p>

<p>
<q>Reulah!</q> he exclaimed, <q>the Lord
be with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Reulah answering, as etiquette required,
<q>Unto you be peace, and to your
house be peace, and unto all you have be
peace,</q> the two friends clasped hands
raised them as though to kiss them, then
each withdrawing kissed his own hand,
and struck it on his forehead.
</p>

<p>
Singularly enough, host and guest
looked much alike. Simon had the appearance
of one conscious of and strong
in his own rectitude, while Reulah seemed
humbler and more effaced. Otherwise
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>there was not a pin to choose between
them.
</p>

<p>
To Simon’s face had come an expression
of perplexity in which there was
zeal.
</p>

<p>
<q>I was thinking, Reulah,</q> he announced,
<q>of the rabbi who is to break
bread with us to-day. His teaching does
not comfort me.</q>
</p>

<p>
Reulah was unlatching his shoes. <q>Nor
me,</q> he interjected.
</p>

<p>
<q>On questions of purity and impurity
he seems unscrupulously negligent. I
have heard that he is a glutton and a
wine-bibber. I have heard that he despises
the washing of the hands.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Whoso does,</q> Reulah threw back,
<q>will be rooted out of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon nodded; a smile of protracted
amiability hovered in the corners of his
mouth. For a moment he played with
his beard.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think,</q> he added, <q>that he will find
here food in plenty, and counsel as well.</q>
</p>

<p>
Reulah closed his eyes benignly, and
Simon, in a falsetto which he affected
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>when he desired to impress, continued in
gentle menace:
</p>

<p>
<q>But I have certain questions to put to
him. Whether water from an unclean
vessel defiles that which is clean.
Whether the flesh of a dead body alone
defiles, or the skin and bones as well. I
want to see how he will answer that.
Then I may ask his opinion on points of
the ritual. Should the incense be lighted
before the high-priest appears or as he
does so. Is or is not the Sabbath broken
by the killing of the Paschal lamb?
Why is it lawful to take tithe of corn and
wine and oil, and not of anise, cummin,
and peppers? In swearing by the Temple,
should one not first swear by the
gold on the Temple? and in swearing by
the altar, should one or should one not
first swear by the sacrifices on it? These
things, since he preaches, he must know.
If he does not——</q>
</p>

<p>
And Simon looked at his friend as who
should say: What is there wanting in me?
</p>

<p>
<q>If I may be taught another duty I
will observe it,</q> said Reulah, sweetly.
</p>

<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>

<p>
At this evidence of meekness Simon
grunted. Two other guests were approaching.
On the edges of their tallîth
were tassels made of four threads which
had been drawn through an eyelet and
doubled to make eight. Seven of these
threads were of equal length, but the
eighth was longer, and, twisted into five
knots, represented the five books of the
Law. The right hand on the left breast,
they saluted their host, and placing in
turn a hand under his beard, they kissed
it. A buzz of inquiries followed, interrupted
by the coming and embracing of
newer guests, the unloosing of sandals,
the washing of feet.
</p>

<p>
As they assembled, one drew Simon
aside and whispered importantly. Simon’s
eyes dilated, astonishment lifted
him, visibly, like a lash, and his hands
trembled above his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you heard,</q> he exclaimed to the
others—<q>have you heard that the Nazarene
whom I invited here, and who pretends
to be a prophet, allowed his followers
to pluck corn on the Sabbath, to
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>thresh it even, and defended and approved
their violation of the Law? Have
you heard it? Is <anchor id="corr118"/><corr sic="is">it</corr> true?</q>
</p>

<p>
Reulah quaked as one stricken by
palsy. <q>On the Sabbath!</q> he moaned.
<q>On the Sabbath! Why, I would not
send a message on Wednesday, lest perchance
it should be delivered on the
Sabbath day. Surely it cannot be.</q>
</p>

<p>
But on that point the others were certain.
They were all aware of the scandal;
one had been an eye-witness, another had
heard the Nazarene assert that he was
<q>Lord of the Day.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This is monstrous!</q> Simon cried.
</p>

<p>
<q>He declared,</q> the eye-witness continued,
<q>that the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is monstrous!</q> Simon repeated.
<q>The command to do no manner of work
is absolute and emphatic. The killing
of a flea on the Sabbath is as heinous as
the butchering of a bullock. The preservation
of life itself is inhibited. Moses
had the son of Shelomith stoned to death
for gathering sticks on it. Shammai
oc<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>cupied six days of the week in thinking
how he could best observe it. It is unlawful
to wear a false tooth on the Sabbath,
and if a tooth ache it is unlawful to
rinse the mouth with vinegar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yet,</q> objected Reulah, <q>it is lawful
to hold the vinegar in the mouth provided
you swallow it afterward.</q>
</p>

<p>
No one paid any attention to him.
Simon’s indignation increased. Of the
thirty-nine Abhôth he quoted twelve; he
showed that the Nazarene had violated
each one of these prohibitions against
labor; he showed, too, that by his subsequent
speech and bearing he had practically
scoffed at the Toldôth, at the
synagogue which had drawn it up as
well.
</p>

<p>
<q>If the Sadducees were not in power,
Jerusalem should hear of this. As it
is——</q>
</p>

<p>
Whatever resolution he may have intended
to express remained unuttered. A
silence fell upon his lips; his guests drew
back. At the step stood the Nazarene, behind
him his treasurer, Judas of Kerioth.
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>For a second only Jesus hesitated. He
stooped, undid his shoes, and moved to
where Simon stood. The latter bowed
constrainedly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Master,</q> he said, <q>we awaited you.</q>
</p>

<p>
At this his friends retreated into the
little room. Reulah reached the middle
seat of the central mat first and held it,
his nostrils quivering at the envy of the
others.
</p>

<p>
Preceded by their host, Jesus and
Judas found places near together, and,
the usual ablutions performed, the customary
prayers recited, lay, the upper
part of the body supported by the left
arm, the head raised, the limbs outstretched.
</p>

<p>
On the stools were dishes of stewed
lentils, milk, and cakes of mashed locusts.
Reulah ate with the tips of his lips,
greedily, like a goat. Judas, too, ate
with an air of hunger. The Master
broke bread absently, his thoughts on
other things. These thoughts Simon interrupted.
</p>

<p>
<q>Rabbi</q>—and to his wide mouth came
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>the sneer of one propounding a riddle
already solved—<q>it is not meet, is it, to
thresh on the Sabbath day? Yet since
you permit your followers to do so, how
are we to distinguish between what is
lawful and what is not?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Master raised his eyes. The dawn
was in them, high noon as well.
</p>

<p>
<q>Show yourself a tried money-changer.
Choose that which is good metal, reject
that which is bad.</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon blinked as at a sudden light.
</p>

<p>
<q>But,</q> he persisted, <q>in seeking to
observe the Law, there is not a jot or
tittle in it that can be rejected.</q>
</p>

<p>
With an acquiescence that was both
vague and melancholy, Jesus looked the
Pharisee in the face.
</p>

<p>
<q>Seek those things that are great, and
little things will be added unto you——</q>
</p>

<p>
He would have said more, perhaps, but
a woman who had entered from the recess
approached circuitously, and kneeling
beside him let a tear, long as a pearl,
fall upon his unsandalled feet.
</p>

<p>
Judas’ heart bounded; he glared at
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>her, his eyes dilating like a leopard preparing
to spring. At once he was back
in the circus, gazing into the perils and
the splendors of a woman’s face, telling
himself with reiterated insistence that to
hold her to him would be the birthday
of his life; and here, within reach of his
hand, was she whom in the din of the
chariots he had recognized as the one
woman in all the world, and who for one
moment the day before had lain unconscious
in his arms.
</p>

<p>
Reulah sat motionless, his mouth
agape, a finger extended. <q>The paramour
of Pandera,</q> he stammered at last;
and lowering his eyes, he looked at her
covetously from beneath the lids.
</p>

<p>
Simon, too, sat motionless. There was
rage in his expression, hate even—that
hatred which the beautiful excites in the
base. Time and again he had seen her;
she was a byword with him; from the
height of her residence she looked down
on his mean gray walls; her luxury had
been an insult to his abstinence; and with
that zest which a small nature takes in
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>the humiliation of its superior, he determined,
in spite of her manifest abjection,
to humiliate her still more.
</p>

<p>
<q>If this man,</q> he confided to his
neighbor, <q>has in him anything of that
which goes to the making of a prophet,
he will divine what manner of woman
she is. If he does not, I will denounce
them both.</q> And nourishing his hate he
waited yet a while.
</p>

<p>
The Master seemed depressed. The
great secret which in all the world
he alone possessed may have weighed
with him. But he turned to Mary and
looked at her. As he looked she bent
yet lower. The marvel of her hair was
unconfined; it fell about her in tangling
streams of gold and flame, while on
his feet there fell from her tears such
as no woman ever shed before. In the
era of primitive hospitality the daughters
of kings had not disdained to unlatch
the sandals of their fathers’ guests; but
now, at the feet of Mercy, for the first
time Repentance knelt. And still the
tears continued, unstanched and
unde<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>tained. Grief, something keener still
perhaps, had claimed her as its own.
She bent lower. Then Misery looked up
at Compassion.
</p>

<p>
The Master stretched his hand. For
a moment it rested on her head. She
quivered and clutched at her throat; and
as he withdrew that hand, in which all
panaceas were, from her gown she took a
little box, opened it, and dropping the
contents where the tears had fallen, with
a sudden movement she caught her hair
and poured its lava on his feet.
</p>

<p>
An aroma of beckoning oases filled the
small room, passed into the recess, mounted
to the roof, pervaded and penetrated
it, and escaped to the sky above.
</p>

<p>
And still she wept. Judas no longer
saw her tears, he heard them. They fell
swiftly one after another, like the ripple
of the rain. A sob broke from her, but
in it was something which foretokened
peace, the sob which comes to those who
have conceived a despairing hope, and
suddenly intercept its fulfilment. Her
hands trembled; the little box fell from
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>her and broke. The noise it made exorcised
the silence.
</p>

<p>
The Master turned to his host. <q>I have
a word to say to you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon stroked his beard and bowed.
</p>

<p>
<q>There was once a man who had two
debtors. One owed him five hundred
pence, the other fifty. Both were poor,
and because of their poverty the debt of
each he forgave.</q>
</p>

<p>
For an instant Jesus paused and seemed
to muse; then, with that indulgence which
was to illuminate the world, <q>Tell me,
Simon,</q> he inquired, <q>which was the
more grateful?</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon assumed an air of perplexity,
and glanced cunningly from one guest to
another. Presently he laughed outright.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, the one who owed the most, of
course.</q>
</p>

<p>
Reulah suppressed a giggle. By the
expression of the others it was patent that
to them also the jest appealed. Only
Judas did not seem to have heard; he sat
bolt upright, fumbling Mary with his
violent eyes.
</p>

<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>

<p>
The Master made a gesture of assent,
and turned to where Mary crouched. She
was staring at him with that look which
the magnetized share with animals.
</p>

<p>
<q>You see her?</q>
</p>

<p>
Straightening himself, he leaned on his
elbow and scrutinized his host.
</p>

<p>
<q>Simon, I am your guest. When I
entered here there was no kiss to greet
me, there was no oil for my head, no water
for my feet. But this woman whom you
despise has not ceased to embrace them.
She has washed them with her tears,
anointed them with nard, and dried them
with her hair. Her sins, it may be, are
many, but, Simon, they are forgiven——</q>
</p>

<p>
Simon, Reulah, the others, muttered
querulously. To forgive sins was indeed
an attribute which no one, save the Eternal,
could arrogate to himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>—for she has loved much.</q>
</p>

<p>
And turning again to Mary, who still
crouched at his side, he added:
</p>

<p>
<q>Your sins are forgiven. Go now, and
in peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the fierce surprise of the Pharisees
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>was not to be shocked into silence.
Reulah showed his teeth; they were
pointed and treacherous as a jackal’s.
Simon loudly asserted disapproval and
wonder too.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am amazed——</q> he began.
</p>

<p>
The Master checked him:
</p>

<p>
<q>The beginning of truth is amazement.
Wonder, then, at what you see; for he that
wonders shall reign, and he that reigns
shall rest.</q>
</p>

<p>
The music of his voice heightened the
beauty of the speech. On Mary it fell
and rested as had the touch of his hand.
</p>

<p>
<q>Messiah, my Lord!</q> she cried. <q>In
your breast is the future, in your heart
the confidence of God. Let me but tell
you. There are those that live whose
lives are passed; the tombs do not hold
all of those that are dead. I was dead;
you brought me to life. I had no conscience;
you gave me one, for I was dead,</q>
she insisted. <q>And yet,</q> she added, with
a little moan, so human, so sincere, that it
might have stirred a Cæsar, let alone a
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>Christ, <q>not wholly dead. No, no, dear
Lord, not wholly dead.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again her tears gushed forth, profuser
and more abundant than before; her frail
body shook with sobs, her fingers intertwined.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not wholly dead,</q> she kept repeating.
<q>No, no, not wholly dead.</q>
</p>

<p>
Jesus touched his treasurer.
</p>

<p>
<q>She is not herself. Lead her away;
see her to her home.</q> And that the
others might hear, and profit as well, he
added, in a higher key, <q>Deference to a
woman is always due.</q>
</p>

<p>
And to those words, which were to found
chivalry and banish the boor, Judas led
Mary from the room.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER VI.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg130"/>

<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>

<head rend="page-break-before: right">VI.</head>

<p>
<q>Are you better?</q>
</p>

<p>
The road that skirted the lake had
branched to the left, and there an easy
ascent led to the hill beyond. On both
sides were carpets of flowers and of green,
and slender larches that held their arms
and hid the sky. Above, an eagle circled,
and on the lake a sail flapped idly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I am better,</q> Mary answered.
</p>

<p>
From her eyes the perils had passed,
but the splendors remained, accentuated
now by vistas visible only to herself.
The antimony, too, with which she darkened
them had gone, and with it the
alkanet she had used on her cheeks.
Her dress was olive, and, contrary to
custom, her head uncovered.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are not strong, perhaps?</q>
</p>

<p>
As Judas spoke, he thought of the
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>episode in the synagogue, and wished her
again unconscious in his arms.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have been so weak,</q> she murmured.
And after a moment she added: <q>I am
tired; let me sit awhile.</q>
</p>

<p>
The carpet of flowers and of green invited,
and presently Judas dropped at
her side. About his waist a linen girdle
had been wound many times; from it a
bag of lynx-skin hung. The white garments,
the ample turban that he wore,
were those of ordinary life, but in his
bearing was just that evanescent charm
which now and then the Oriental possesses—the
subtlety that subjugates and
does not last.
</p>

<p>
<q>But you must be strong; we need
your strength.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary turned to him wonderingly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> he repeated, <q>we need your
strength. Johanna has joined us, as you
know. Susannah too. They do what
they can; but we need others—we need
you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you mean——</q>
</p>

<p>
Something had tapped at her heart,
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>something which was both joy and dread,
and she hesitated, fearing that the possibility
which Judas suggested was unreal,
that she had not heard his words aright.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you mean that he would let me?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He would love you for it. But then
he loves everyone, yet best, I think, his
enemies.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They need it most,</q> Mary answered;
but her thoughts had wandered.
</p>

<p>
<q>And I,</q> Judas added—<q>I loved you
long ago.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then he too hesitated, as though uncertain
what next to say, and glanced at
her covertly. She was looking across the
lake, over the country of the Gadarenes,
beyond even that, perhaps, into some
infinite veiled to him.
</p>

<p>
<q>I remember,</q> he continued, tentatively,
<q>it was there at Tiberias I saw
you first. You were entering the palace.
I waited. The sentries ordered me off;
one threw a stone. I went to where the
garden is; I thought you might be among
the flowers. The wall was so high I
could not see. The guards drove me
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>away. I ran up the hill through the
white and red terraces of the grape.
From there I could see the gardens, the
elephants with their ears painted, and
the oxen with the twisted horns. The
wind sung about me like a flute; the
sky was a tent of different hues. Something
within me had sprung into life. It
was love, I knew. It had come before,
yes, often, but never as then. For,</q> he
added, and the gleam of his eyes was as
a fanfare to the thought he was about to
express, <q>love returns to the heart as
the leaf returns to the tree.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary looked at him vacantly. <q>What
was he saying?</q> she wondered. From a
sea of grief she seemed to be passing onto
an archipelago of dream.
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The next day I loitered in the neighborhood
of the palace. You did not
appear. Toward evening I questioned a
gardener. He said your name was Mary,
but he would tell me nothing else. On
the morrow was the circus. I made sure
you would be there—with the tetrarch, I
thought; and, that I might be near the
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>tribune, before the sun had set I was at
the circus gate. There were others that
came and waited, but I was first. I remember
that night as never any since. I
lay outstretched, and watched the moon;
your face was in it: it was a dream, of
course. Yes, the night passed quickly,
but the morning lagged. When the gate
was open, I sprang like a zemer from tier
to tier until I reached the tribune.
There, close by, I sat and waited. At
last you came, and with you new perfumes
and poisons. Did you feel my
eyes? they must have burned into you.
But no, you gave no heed to me. They
told me afterward that Scarlet won three
times. I did not know. I saw but you.
Once merely an abyss in which lightning
was.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Before the last race was done I got
down and tried to be near the exit
through which I knew you must pass.
The guards would not let me. The next
day I made friends with a sentry. He
told me that you were Mirjam of Magdala;
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>that Tiberius wished you at Rome, and
that you had gone with Antipas to his
citadel. In the wine-shops that night
men slunk from me afraid. A week followed
of which I knew nothing, then
chance disentangled its threads. I found
myself in a crowd at the base of a hill;
a prophet was preaching. I had heard
prophets before; they were as torches
in the night: he was the Day. I listened
and forgot you. He called me; I followed.
Until Sunday I had not thought
of you again. But when you appeared in
the synagogue I started; and when you
fainted, when I held you in my arms and
your eyes opened as flowers do, I looked
into them and it all returned. Mary, kiss
me and kill me, but kiss me first.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, he is the Day.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of the entire speech she had heard
but that. It had entered perhaps into
thoughts of her own with which it was
in unison, and she repeated the phrase
mechanically, as a child might do. But
now as he ceased to speak, perplexed,
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>annoyed too at the inappositeness of her
reply, she came back from the infinite in
which she had roamed, and for a moment
both were silent.
</p>

<p>
At the turning of the road a man appeared.
At the sight of Judas he halted,
then called him excitedly by name.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is Mathias,</q> Judas muttered, and
got to his feet. The man hurried to
them. He was broad of shoulder and of
girth, the jaw lank and earnest. His
eyes were small, and the lids twitched
nervously. He was out of breath, and
his garments were dust-covered.
</p>

<p>
<q>Where is the Master?</q> he asked; and
at once, without waiting a reply, he added:
<q>I have just seen Johanna. Her husband
told her that the tetrarch is seeking
him; he thinks him John, and would do
him harm. We must go from here.</q>
</p>

<p>
Judas assented. <q>Yes, we must all
go. Mary, it may be a penance, but it is
his will.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mathias gazed inquiringly at them
both.
</p>

<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>

<p>
<q>It is his will,</q> Judas repeated, authoritatively.
</p>

<p>
Mary turned away and caught her
forehead in her hands. <q>If this is a
penance,</q> she murmured, <q>what then are
his rewards?</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER VII.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg140"/>

<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>

<head rend="page-break-before: right">VII.</head>

<p>
On the floor of a little room Mary lay,
her face to the ground. In her ears was
the hideousness of a threat that had
fastened on her abruptly like a cheetah
in the dark. From below came the
sound of banqueting. Beyond was the
Bitter Sea, the stars dancing in its ripples;
and there in the shadow of the evergreens
was the hut in which that Sephôrah
lived to whom long ago Martha had
forbidden her to speak. Through the
lattice came the scent of olive-trees, and
with it the irresistible breath of spring.
</p>

<p>
In its caress the threat which had
made her its own presently was lifted,
and mingling with other things fused into
them. The kaleidoscope of time and
events which visits those that drown
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>possessed her, and for a second Mary relived
a year.
</p>

<p>
There had been the sudden flight from
Magdala, the first days with the Master,
the gorges of the Jordan, the journey to
the coast, the glittering green scales of
that hydra the sea. Then the loiterings
on the banks of the sacred Leontes, the
journey back to Galilee, the momentary
halt at Magdala, the sail past Bethsaïda,
Capharnahum, Chorazin, the fording of
the river, the trip to Cæsarea Philippi,
the snow and gold of Hermon, the visit
to Gennesareth, the pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
and the return to Bethany.
</p>

<p>
Her recollections intercrossed, scenes
that were trivial ousted others that were
grave; the purple limpets of Sidon, the
shrine of Ashtaroth, the invective at
Bethsaïda, the transfiguration on the
mountain height, the cure of lepers, and
the presence that coerced. Yet through
them all certain things remained immutable,
and of these, primarily her contact
with the Christ.
</p>

<p>
To her, Jesus was not the Son of man
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>alone, he was the light of this world, the
usher of the next. When he spoke, there
came to her a sense of frightened joy so
acute that the hypostatical union which
left even the disciples perplexed was by
her realized and understood. She had
the faith of a little child. And on the
hills and through the intervales over
which they journeyed, in the glare of
the eager sun or beneath the wattled
boughs, the emanations of the Divine
filled her with transports so contagious
that they affected even Thomas, who was
skeptical by birth; and when, after the
descent from Hermon, two or three of the
disciples mused together over the spectacle
which they had seen, the rhyme of her
lips parted ineffably. She too had seen
him aureoled with the sun, dazzling as
the snow-fields on the heights. To her
it was ever in that aspect he appeared,
with a radiance so intense even that there
had been moments in which she had
veiled her eyes as from a light that only
eagles could support. To her, marvels
were as natural as the escape of night.
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>At Beth-Seân she had heard him speak
to dumb beasts, and never doubted but
that they answered him. At Dan she
had seen a short-eared hare rush to him
for refuge, and follow him afterwards as
a dog might do. At Kinnereth he had
called to a lark that from a tree-top was
pouring its heart out to the morning, and
the lark had fluttered down and nestled
in his hand. At Gadara he had tamed
wild doves, and a swarm of bees had
stopped and glistened in his hair. At
Cæsarea, when he began to speak, the
thrushes that had been singing ceased;
and when the parables were delivered,
began anew, louder, more jubilant than
before, and continued to sing until he
blessed them, when they mounted in one
long ascending line straight to the zenith
above. At his approach the little gold-bellied
fish of the Leontes had leaped
from the stream. In the suburbs of
Sidon the jackals had fawned at his feet.
The underbrush had parted to let him
pass, and where he passed white roses
came and the tenderness of anemones.
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>At times he seemed to her immaterial as
a shadow in a dream, at others appalling
as the desert; and once when, in prayer,
she entered with him into the intimacy of
the infinite, she caught the shiver of an
invisible harp whose notes seemed to fall
from the night. And as she journeyed, her
love expanded with the horizon. She
loved with a love no woman’s heart has
transcended. In its prodigality and ascending
gammes there was place for
nothing save the Ideal.
</p>

<p>
The little band meanwhile lived as
strangers on earth. Out of her abundant
means their simple wants were supplied.
She was less a burden than a sustenance;
her faith bridged many a doubtful hour;
and when, as often occurred, they disputed
among themselves concerning their
future rank and precedence, Mary
dreamed of a paradise more pure.
</p>

<p>
One evening, near the rushes of Lake
Phiala, where the Jordan leaps anew to
the light, a Greek merchant who had refused
them shelter at Seleucia ambled
that way on an ass, and would have
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>stopped, perhaps, but one of the band
scoffed him, and he rode on, and disappeared
in the haze of the hills.
</p>

<p>
Unobserved, the Master had seen and
heard; presently he called them to where
he stood.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do not think,</q> he admonished—<q>do
not think that because you imitate the
Pharisees you are perfecting your lives.
They fast, they pray, they weep, and they
mortify the flesh; but to them one thing
is impossible, charity to the failings of
others. Whoso then shall come to you,
be he friend or foe, penitent or thief, receive
him kindly. Aid the helpless, console
the unfortunate, forgive your enemy,
and forget yourselves—that is charity.
Without it the kingdom of heaven is lost
to you. There, there is neither Greek
nor Jew, male nor female; nor can it come
to you until the garment of shame is
trampled under foot, until two are as
one, and the body which is without is as
the soul within.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thereat, with a gesture of exquisite
in<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>dulgence, he turned and left them to the
stars.
</p>

<p>
Mary had heard, and in the palingenesis
disclosed she saw space wrapped in
a luminous atmosphere, such as she fancied
lay behind the sun. There, instead
of the thrones and diadems of the elect,
was an immutable realm in which there
was neither death nor life, clear ether
merely, charged with beatitudes. And so,
when the disciples disputed among themselves,
Mary dreamed of diaphanous
hours and immaculate days that knew
no night, and in this wise lived until
from the terrace of Jerusalem’s Temple
the Master bade her return to Bethany
and wait him there.
</p>

<p>
Obedience to that command was bitter
to her. She did not murmur, however.
<q>Rabboni,</q> she cried, <q>let me but do
your will on earth, and afterwards save
me or destroy me as your pleasure is.</q>
</p>

<p>
With that she had gone to her sister’s
house, and to the bewildered Martha
poured out her heart anew. There could
be no question of forgiveness now, of
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>penitence even; her sins, such as they
were, had been remitted by one to whom
pardon was an attribute. And this doubtless
Martha understood, for she took her
in her arms unreproachfully and mingled
her tears with hers.
</p>

<p>
Where all is marvel the marvellous disappears.
To the accounts which Mary
gave of her journeys with the little
band that followed the Master, Martha
listened with an attention which nothing
could distract. With her she sailed
on the lovely lake; with her she visited
cities smothering in the scent of cassia
and of sugar-cane; with her she passed
through glens where panthers prowled,
and bandits crueller than they. With
her eyes she saw the listening multitudes,
with her ears she heard again the
words of divine forgiveness; and, the lulab
and the citron in her hands, she assisted
at the Feast of the Tabernacles, and
watched the vain attempt to charm the
recalcitrant Temple and captivate the
inimical town.
</p>

<p>
For in Jerusalem, in place of the
re<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>assuring confidence of peasants, was the
irritable incredulity of priests; instead
of meadows, courts. Besides, was not this
prophet from Galilee, and what good had
ever come from there? Then, too, he
was not an authorized teacher. He belonged
to no school. The followers of
Hillel, the disciples of Shammai, did not
recognize him. He was merely a fractious
Nazarene trained in the shop of a
carpenter; one who, by repeating that
it was easier for a camel to pass through
a needle’s eye than for a rich man to
enter the kingdom of heaven, flattered
basely the mob of mendicants that surrounded
him. The rabble admired, but
the clergy stood aloof. When he was not
ignored he was disdained. Save the pleb,
no one listened.
</p>

<p>
Presently he spoke louder. Into the
grave music of the Syro-Chaldaic tongue
he put the mutterings of thunder. Where
he had preached, he upbraided; in place
of exquisite parables came sonorous
threats. He blessed but rarely, sometimes
he cursed. That mosaic, the Law,
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>he treated like a cobweb; and to the arrogant
clergy a rumor filtered that this
vagabond, who had not where to lay his
head, declared his ability to destroy the
Temple, and to rebuild it, in three days,
anew.
</p>

<p>
A rumor such as that was incredible.
Inquiries were made. The rumor was
substantiated. It was learned that he
healed the sick, cured the blind; that he
was in league, perhaps, with the Pharisees.
</p>

<p>
The Sanhedrim took counsel. They
were Sadducees every one. The Pharisees
were their hereditary foes. Both were
militant, directing men and things as best
they could. The Sadducees held strictly to
the letter of the Law; the Pharisees held
to the Law, and to tradition as well. But
the Sadducees were in power, the Pharisees
were not. The former endeavored
in every way to maintain their authority
over the people; and against that authority,
against the aristocracy, the priesthood,
and the accomplices of foreign dominion,
the Pharisees ceaselessly excited
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>the mob. In their inability to overthrow
the pontificate, they undermined it. With
microscopic attention they examined and
criticised every act of the clergy; and,
with a view of showing the incompetence
of the priests, they affected rigid theories
in regard to ritualistic points. Every
detail of the ceremonial office was watched
by them with eyes that were never pleased.
They asserted that the rolls of the Law
from which the priests read the Pentateuch
were made of impure matter, and,
having handled them, the priests had
become impure as well. The manner in
which the incense was made and offered,
the minutiæ governing the sacrifices, the
legality of hierarchal decisions—on each
and every possible subject they exerted
themselves to show the unworthiness of
the officiants, insinuating even that the
names of the fathers of many of the
priests were not inscribed at Zipporim
in the archives of Jeshana. As a consequence,
many of those whose rights the
Pharisees affected to uphold saw in the
hierarchy little more than a body of men
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>unworthy to approach the altar, a group
of Herodians who in religion lacked every
requisite for the service of God, and who
in public and in private were bankrupts in
patriotism, morality, and shame.
</p>

<p>
The possibility, therefore, that this
fractious demagogue had found favor
with the Pharisees was grave. He was
becoming a force. He threatened many
a prerogative. Moreover, Jerusalem had
had enough of agitators. People were
drawn by their promises into the solitudes,
and there incited to revolt. Rome
did not look upon these things leniently.
If they continued, Tiberius was quite capable
of putting Judæa in a yoke which
it would not be easy to carry. Clearly
the Nazarene was seditious, and as such
to be abolished. The difficulty was to
abolish him and yet conciliate the mob.
</p>

<p>
It was then that the Sanhedrim took
counsel. As a result, and with the hope
of entrapping him into some blasphemous
utterance on which a charge would lie,
they sent meek-eyed Scribes to question
him concerning the authority that he
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>claimed. He routed the meek-eyed
Scribes. Then, fancying that he might
be seduced into some expression which
could be construed as treason, they sent
young and earnest men to learn from him
their duty to Rome. The young and
earnest men returned crestfallen and
abashed.
</p>

<p>
The elders, nonplussed, debated. A
levite suspected that the casuistry and
marvellous cures of the Nazarene must
be due to a knowledge of the incommunicable
name, Shemhammephorash, seared
on stone in the thunders of Sinai, and
which to utter was to summon life or
beckon death. Another had heard that
while in Galilee he was believed to be in
league with Baal-Zebub, Lord of Flies.
</p>

<p>
To this gossip no attention was paid.
Annas, merely—the old high-priest,
father-in-law of Caiaphas, who officiated
in his stead—laughed to himself. There
was no such stone, there was no such god.
Another idea had been welcomed. A
festival was in progress; there was gayety
in the neighborhood, drinking too; and
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>as over a million of pilgrims were herded
together, now and then an offence occurred.
The previous night, for instance,
a woman had been arrested for illicit commerce.
</p>

<p>
Annas tapped on his chin. He had the
pompous air of a chameleon, the same
long, thin lips, the large, protruding eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Take her before the Galilean,</q> he
said. <q>He claims to be a rabbi; he must
know the Law. If he acquit her, it is
heresy, and for that a charge will lie.
Does he condemn her he is at our mercy,
for he will have alienated the mob.</q>
</p>

<p>
A smile of perfect understanding passed
like a vagrant breeze across the faces of
the elders, and the levites were ordered
to lead the prisoner to the Christ.
</p>

<p>
They found him in the Woman’s Court.
From a lateral chamber a priest, unfit for
other than menial services because of a
carbuncle on his lip, dropped the wood
he was sorting for the altar and gazed
curiously at the advancing throng, in
which the prisoner was.
</p>

<p>
She must have been very fair, but now
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>her features were distorted with anguish,
veiled with shame. The blue robe she
wore was torn, and a sleeve rent to the
shoulder disclosed a bare white arm.
She was a wife, a mother too. Her name
was Ahulah; her husband was a shoemaker.
At the Gannath Gate, where her
home was, were two little children. She
worshipped them, and her husband she
adored. Some hallucination, a tremor of
the flesh, the flush of wine, and there, circled
by a leering crowd, she crouched, her
life disgraced, irrecoverable for evermore.
</p>

<p>
The charge was made, the usual question
propounded. The Master had
glanced at her but once. He seemed to
be looking afar, beyond the Temple and
its terraces, beyond the horizon itself.
But the accusers were impatient. He bent
forward and with a finger wrote on the
ground. The letters were illegible, perhaps,
yet the symbol of obliteration was
in that dust which the morrow would disperse.
Again he wrote, but the charge
was repeated, louder, more impatiently
than before.
</p>

<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>

<p>
Jesus straightened himself. With the
weary indulgence of one to whom hearts
are as books, he looked about him, then
to the dome above.
</p>

<p>
<q>Whoever is without sin among you,</q>
he declared, <q>may cast the first stone.</q>
</p>

<p>
When he looked again the crowd had
slunk away. Only Ahulah remained, her
head bowed on her bare white arm.
From the lateral chamber the priest still
peered, the carbuncle glistening on his
lip.
</p>

<p>
<q>Did none condemn you?</q> the Master
asked.
</p>

<p>
And as she sobbed merely, he added:
<q>Neither do I condemn you. Go, and
sin no more.</q>
</p>

<p>
To the elders this was very discomforting.
They had failed to unmask him as
a traitor to God, to Rome even, or yet as
a demagogue defying the Law. They did
not care to question again. He had
worsted them three times. Nor could
they without due cause arrest him, for
there were the Pharisees. Besides, a religious
trial was full of risk, and the
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>coöperation of the procurator not readily
to be relied on. It was that coöperation
they needed most, for with it such feeling
as might be aroused would fall on Rome
and not on them. As for Pilate, he could
put a sword in front of what he said.
</p>

<p>
In their enforced inaction they got
behind that wall of prejudice where they
and their kin feel most secure, and there
waited, prepared at the first opportunity
to invoke the laws of their ancestors,
laws so cumbersome and complex that
the Romans, accustomed to the clearest
pandects, had laughed and left them,
erasing only the right to kill.
</p>

<p>
At last chance smiled. Into Jerusalem
a rumor filtered that the Nazarene they
hated so had raised the dead, that the
suburbs hailed him as the Messiah, and
that he proclaimed himself the Son of
God. At once the Sanhedrim reassembled.
A political deliverer they might
have welcomed, but in a Messiah they
had little faith. The very fact of his
Messiahship constituted him a claimant
to the Jewish throne, and as such a
pre<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>tender with whom Pilate could deal.
Moreover—and here was the point—to
claim divinity was to attack the unity of
God. Of impious blasphemy there was
no higher form.
</p>

<p>
It were better, Annas suggested, that
a man should die than that a nation
should perish—a truism, surely, not to
be gainsaid.
</p>

<p>
That night it was decided that Jesus
and Judaism could not live together; a
price was placed upon his head, and to
the blare of four hundred trumpets excommunication
was pronounced.
</p>

<p>
Of all of these incidents save the
last Mary had been necessarily aware.
In company with Johanna, the wife of
Herod’s steward, Mary, wife of Clopas,
and Salomè, mother of Zebedee’s children,
she had heard him reiterate the burning
words of Jeremiah, and seen him purge
the Temple of its traffickers; she had
heard, too, the esoteric proclamation,
<q>Before Abraham was, I am;</q> and she
had seen him lash the Sadducees with
invective. She had been present when a
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>letter was brought from Abgar Uchomo,
King of Edessa, to Jesus, <q>the good
Redeemer,</q> in which the potentate prayed
the prophet to come and heal him of a
sickness which he had, offering him a
refuge from the Jews, and quaintly setting
forth the writer’s belief that Jesus was
God or else His Son. She had been
present, also, when the charge was made
against Ahulah, and had comforted that
unfortunate in womanly ways. <q>Surely,</q>
she had said, <q>if the Master who does
not love you can forgive, how much more
readily must your husband who does!</q>
Whereupon Ahulah had become her
slave, tending her thereafter with almost
bestial devotion.
</p>

<p>
These episodes, one after another,
she related to Martha; to Eleazer, her
brother; to Simon, Martha’s husband; to
anyone that chanced that way. For it
was then that the Master had bade her
go to Bethany. For a little space he
too had forsaken Jerusalem. Now and
then with some of his followers he would
venture in the neighborhood, yet only to
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>be off again through the scorched hollows
of the Ghôr before the sun was up.
</p>

<p>
These things it was that paraded before
her as she lay on the floor of the
little room, felled by the hideousness
of a threat that had sprung upon her,
abruptly, like a cheetah in the dark. To
Martha and to the others on one subject
alone had she been silent, and now at the
moment it dominated all else.
</p>

<p>
From the day on which she joined the
little band to whom the future was to
give half of this world and all of the
next, Judas had been ever at her ear.
As a door that opens and shuts at the
will of a hand, his presence and absence
had barred the vistas or left them clear.
At first he had affected her as a scarabæus
affects the rose. She knew of him,
and that was all. When he spoke, she
thought of other things. And as the
blind remain unawakened by the day, he
never saw that where the wanton had
been the saint had come. To him she
was a book of ivory bound in gold, whose
contents he longed to possess; she was a
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>book, but one from which whole chapters
had been torn, the preface destroyed;
and when his increasing insistence forced
itself upon her, demanding, obviously,
countenance or rebuke, she walked serenely
on her way, disdaining either, occupied
with higher things. It was of the
Master only that she appeared to think.
When he spoke, it was to her as though
God really lived on earth; her eyes
lighted ineffably, and visibly all else was
instantly forgot. At that time her life
was a dream into whose charmed precincts
a bat had flown.
</p>

<p>
These things, gradually, Judas must
have understood. In Mary’s eyes he
may have caught the intimation that to
her now only the ideal was real; or the
idea may have visited him that in the
infinite of her faith he disappeared and
ceased to be. In any event he must have
taken counsel with himself, for one day
he approached her with a newer theme.
</p>

<p>
<q>I have knocked on the tombs; they
are dumb.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary, with that grace with which a
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>woman gathers a flower when thinking
of him whom she loves, bent a little and
turned away.
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you heard of the Buddha?</q> he
asked. <q>Babylon is peopled with his
disciples. One of them met Jesus in the
desert, and taught him his belief. It is
that he preaches now, only the Buddha
did not know of a heaven, for there is
none.</q>
</p>

<p>
And he added, after a pause: <q>I tell
you I have knocked on the tombs; there
is no answer there.</q>
</p>

<p>
With that, as a panther falls asleep, his
claw blood-red, Judas nodded and left
her to her thoughts.
</p>

<p>
<q>In Eternity there is room for everything,</q>
she said, when he came to her
again.
</p>

<p>
<q>Eternity is an abyss which the tomb
uses for a sewer,</q> he answered. <q>Its
flood is corruption. The day only exists,
but in it is that freedom which waves
possess. Mary, if you would but taste it
with me! Oh, to mix with you as light
with day, as stream with sea, I would
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>suck the flame that flickers on the walls
of sepulchres.</q>
</p>

<p>
She shuddered, and he saw it.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have taught me to love,</q> he
hissed; <q>do not teach me now to hate.</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary mastered her revolt. <q>Judas,
the day will come when you will cease
to speak as you do.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You believe, then, still?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, surely; and so do you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The day will come,</q> he muttered,
<q>when you will cease to believe.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And you too,</q> she answered. <q>For
then you will <hi rend="italic">know</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The dialogue with its variations continued,
at intervals, for months. There
were times, weeks even, when he avoided
all speech with her. Then, abruptly,
when she expected it least, he would
return more volcanic than before. These
attacks she accustomed herself to regard
as necessary, perhaps, to the training of
patience, of charity too, and so bore with
them, until at last Jerusalem was reached.
Meanwhile she held to her trust as to a
fringe of the mantle of Christ. To her
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>the past was a grammar, its name—To-morrow.
And in the service of the
Master, in the future which he had evoked,
she journeyed and dreamed.
</p>

<p>
But in Jerusalem Judas grew acrider.
He had fits of unnecessary laughter, and
spells of the deepest melancholy. He
quarrelled with anyone who would let
him, and then for the irritation he had
displayed he would make amends that
were wholly slavish. His companions
distrusted him. He had been seen talking
amicably with the corrupt levites, the
police of the Temple, and once he had
been detected in a wine-shop of low repute.
The Master, apparently, noticed
nothing of this; nor did Mary, whose
thoughts were on other things.
</p>

<p>
At Bethany one evening Judas came to
her. The sun, sinking through clouds,
placed in the west the tableau of a duel
to the death between a titan and a god.
There was the glitter of gigantic swords,
and the red of immortal blood.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mary,</q> he began, and as he spoke
there was a new note in his voice—<q>Mary,
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>I have watched and waited, and to
those that watch how many lamps
burn out! One after another those that
I tended went. There was a flicker, a
little smoke, and they had gone. I tried
to relight them, but perhaps the oil was
spent; perhaps, too, I was like the blind
that hold a torch. My way has not been
clear. The faith I had, and which, I do
not know, but which, it may be, would
have been strengthened, evaporated when
you came. The rays of the sun I had
revered became as the threads of shadows,
interconnecting life and death. In
them I could see but you. In the jaw of
night, in the teeth of day, always I have
seen you. Mary, love is a net which
woman throws. In casting yours—there!
unintentionally, I know—you caught my
soul. It is yours now wholly until time
shall cease to be. Will you take it,
Mary, or will you put it aside, a thing
forever dead?</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary made no answer. It may be she
had not heard. In the west both titan
and god had disappeared. Above, in a field
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>of stars, the moon hung, a scythe of gold.
The air was still, the hush of locusts accentuating
the silence and bidding it be
at rest. In a house near by there were
lights shining. A woman looked out
and called into the night.
</p>

<p>
Then, as though moved by some jealousy
of the impalpable, Judas leaned forward
and peered into her face.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is the Master who keeps you from
me, is it not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is my belief,</q> she answered, simply.
</p>

<p>
<q>It was he that gave it to you. Mary,
do you know that there is a price upon
his head? Do you know that if I cannot
slake my love, at least I can gorge my
hate? Do you know that, Mary? Do
you know it? Now choose between your
belief and me; if you prefer the former,
the Sanhedrim will have him to-morrow.
There, your sister is calling; go—and
choose.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was with the hideousness of this
threat in her ears that Mary escaped to
the little room where her childhood had
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>been passed and flung herself on the
floor. From beyond came the sound of
banqueting. Martha was entertaining
the Lord, his disciples as well; and Mary
knew that her aid was needed. But the
threat pinioned and held her down. To
accede was death, not of the body alone,
but of the soul as well. There was no
clear pool in which she might cleanse the
stain; there could be no forgiveness, no
obliteration, nothing in fact save the loss
never to be recovered of life in the diaphanous
hours and immaculate days of
which she had dreamed so long.
</p>

<p>
For a little space she tried to comfort
herself. Perhaps Judas was not in earnest;
perhaps even he had lied. And if he
had not, was there not time in plenty?
The desert was neighborly. She could
follow the Master there, and minister to
him till the sky opened and the kingdom
was prepared. And the threat,
coupled with that perspective, charmed,
and for the moment had for her that
enticement which the quarrels and kisses
of children equally possess. She would
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>warn him secretly, she decided, for surely
as yet he did not know; she would warn
him, and before the sun was up he could
be beyond the Sanhedrim’s reach, and
she preparing to follow. For a moment
she lost herself in anticipation; then,
the threat loosening its hold, she stood
up, her face very white in the starlight,
her eyes brave and alert. Already her
plan was formed; and, taking a vase that
she had brought with her from Magdala,
she hurried to the room below.
</p>

<p>
The Master; the disciples; Eleazer,
her brother; Simon, her sister’s husband,
were all at meat. Martha was serving,
and as Mary entered Judas stood up.
She moved to where the Master was, and
on him poured the contents of the vase.
Thomas sniffed delightedly, for now the
room was full of fragrance. The Master
turned to her and smiled; the homage
evidently was grateful. Mary bent nearer.
Thomas and Bartholomew joined in loud
praises of the aroma of the nard, and
under cover of their voices she whispered,
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/><q>Rabboni, the Sanhedrim has placed a
price on——</q>
</p>

<p>
The whisper was drowned and interrupted.
Judas had shoved her away.
<q>To what end is this waste?</q> he asked;
and as Mary looked in his face she saw
by the expression in it that her purpose
had been divined and her warning overheard.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is absurd,</q> he continued, with affected
anger. <q>Ointment such as that has
a value. It might better have been saved
for the poor.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thomas chimed in approvingly; placed
in that light it was indeed an extravagance,
unnecessary too, and he looked
about to his comrades for support. Eleazer
and Peter seemed inclined to view the
matter differently. A discussion would
have arisen, but the Master checked it
gently, as was his wont.
</p>

<p>
<q>The poor are always with you, but me
you cannot always have.</q>
</p>

<p>
As he spoke he turned to Judas with that
indulgence which was to be a heritage.
</p>

<p>
Could he <hi rend="italic">know</hi>? Judas wondered.
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>Had he heard what Mary said? And, the
Master’s speech continuing, he glanced at
her and left the room.
</p>

<p>
The moon had mowed the stars, but the
sky was visibly blue. Behind the shoulder
of Olivet he divined the silence of Jerusalem,
the welcome of the Sadducees, the
joy of hate assuaged. There was but one
thing now that might deter; and as his
thoughts groped through that possibility,
Mary stood at his side.
</p>

<p>
<q>Judas——</q>
</p>

<p>
He wheeled, and, catching her by the
wrists, stared into her eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it yes?</q>
</p>

<p>
A shudder seized her. There was dread
in it, anguish too, and both were mortal.
He had not lied, she saw, and the threat
was real.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it yes?</q> he repeated.
</p>

<p>
There may be moments that prolong,
but there are others in which time no
longer is; and as Mary shrank in the
blight of Judas’ stare, both felt that the
culmination of life was reached.
</p>

<p>
<q>No!</q>
</p>

<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>

<p>
The monosyllable dropped from her
lips like a stone, yet even as it fell the
banner of Maccabæus unfurled and
flaunted in her face; the voice of Esther
murmured, and a vision of Judith saving
a nation visited her, and, continuing,
made spots on the night.
</p>

<p>
Judas had flung her from him. She
reeled; the violence roused her. Who
was she to consider herself when the security
of the Master was at stake? How
should it matter though she died, if he
were safe?
</p>

<p>
<q>It is my soul you ask,</q> she cried.
<q>Take it. If I had a thousand souls, I
would give each one for Him.</q>
</p>

<p>
But she cried to the unanswering night.
Where the road curved about the shoulder
of the Mount of Olives, for one second
she saw a white robe glisten. Agonized,
she called again, but there was no one
now to hear.
</p>

<p>
A little later, when the followers of the
Lord issued from the house, Mary lay before
the door, her eyes closed, her head
in the dust. They touched her. She had
fainted.
</p>
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">

<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER VIII.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg174"/>

<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>

<head rend="page-break-before: right">VIII.</head>

<p>
<q>They have him, they are taking him
to Pilate.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was Eleazer calling to his sister from
the turn of the road. In a moment he
was at her side, dust-covered, his sandals
torn, his pathetic eyes dilated. He was
breathless too, and, in default of words,
with a gesture that swept the Mount of
Olives, he pointed to where the holy city
lay.
</p>

<p>
To Mary the morrow succeeding her
swoon was a pall. Love, it may be, is a
forgetfulness of all things else, but despair
is very actual. It takes a hold on
memory, inhabits it, and makes it its own.
And during the day that followed, Mary
lay preyed upon by the acutest agony
that ever tortured woman yet. Early
in the night, before her senses returned,
the Master had gone without mentioning
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>whither. His destination may have been
Ephraïm, Jericho even, or further yet, beyond
the hollows of the Ghôr. Then, again,
he might have loitered in the neighborhood,
on the hill perhaps, in that open-air
solitude he loved so well, and for which
so often he forsook the narrowness of
roofs and towns. But yet, in view of the
Passover, he might have gone to Jerusalem,
and it was that idea that tortured
most.
</p>

<p>
It was there the keen police, the levites,
were, and their masters the Sadducees,
who had placed a price on his head. Did
he get within the walls, then surely he
was lost. At the possibilities which that
idea evoked her thoughts sank like the
roots of a tree and grappled with the under-earth.
To her despair, regret brought
its burden. A moment of self-forgetfulness,
and, however horrible that forgetfulness
might have been, in it danger to him
whom she revered would have been averted,
and, for the time being at least, dispersed
utterly as last year’s leaves. It
had been cowardice on her part to let
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>Judas go; she should have been strong
when strength was needed. There were
glaives to be had; the head of Holofernes
could have greeted his. The legend
of Judith still echoed its reproach, and
recurring, pointed a slender finger of disdain.
</p>

<p>
To the heart that is sinking, hope throws
a straw. Immaterial and caressing as a
shadow, came to her the fancy that if the
Master were in the neighborhood, at any
moment he might appear. In that event
it was needful that she should be prepared
to aid him at once beyond the confines
of Judæa. Were he already beyond
them, presently she must learn it, and
then could warn him of the danger of
return. But meanwhile, for security’s
sake, had he gone by any chance to Jerusalem,
some one must be there to warn
him of the plot. She thought of her sister,
and dismissed her. Martha was too
feather-headed for an errand such as that.
She thought of Ahulah, but some of those
well-intentioned friends that everyone
possesses had told of the misadventure
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>to her husband, and the latter, cruel as a
woman, had spat upon her, and now
through the suburbs she wandered, distraught,
incompetent to aid. Her brother
occurred to her. It was on him she could
rely. His devotion was surpassed only
by her own. Thereupon she sought him
out, instructed him in his duty, and sent
him forth to watch and warn.
</p>

<p>
The green afternoon faded in the hemorrhages
of the setting sun. Twilight
approached like a wolf. Night unfurled
her great black fan; the moon came,
fumbling the shadows, checkering the
underbrush with silver spots. Once a
caravan passed, and once from the hillside
came the bark of a dog, caught up and
repeated in some farm beyond; otherwise
the night was unstirred; and as Mary
stared into the immensities where lightning
wearies and subsides, a lethargy
beset her, her body was imprisoned; but
her soul was free, and in a moment it
mounted sheerly to a fringe of the heavens
and bathed in space.
</p>

<p>
When it descended, another day had
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>come, and Eleazer was calling to her from
the turn of the road. At once she was on
earth and on her feet, and as the brother
gasped for breath the sister’s strength
returned. There must be no more weakness
now, she knew; it was time to act.
She got drink, water for the feet; then
Eleazer, refreshed, continued:
</p>

<p>
<q>I ran through the ridge and up to
where the two cedars are. I looked among
the cypresses beyond, in the pines
where the descent begins, through the
olive groves below and the booths and
tents beneath. There was no trace of
him anywhere. I crossed the brook and
sat awhile at the Shushan gate, watching
those that entered. The crowd became
so dense that it was impossible to distinguish.
I thought I might hear of him
in the Temple. The porch was thronged.
I roamed through the Mountain of the
House into the Woman’s Court, and out
of it on the Chel. But they were all so
filled with pilgrims that had he been
there only accident could have brought
me to him. It was on that I counted, and
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>I went out on Zion and Acra, where the
crowd was less. It was getting late.
Beth-horon was dim. I could see lights
in Herod’s palace. Some one said that
the tetrarch of Galilee was there, the
guest of the procurator. I went back by
way of Antonia to Birket Israil and the
Red Heifer Bridge. I had given up;
it seemed to me useless to make further
attempt. Suddenly I saw Judas in the
angle of the porch. With him was a levite.
I got behind a pillar, near where
they stood, and listened. The only thing
I distinctly heard was the name of Joseph
of Haramathaïm. I fancied, though I was
not certain, that Judas spoke as though
he had just left his house. They must
have moved away then, for when I looked
they had gone. I knew that Joseph was
a friend of the Master’s, and it struck me
that he might be at his house. It is in
the sook of the Perfumers, back of Ophel.
I ran there as fast as I could. It was unlighted.
I beat on the door: there was
no answer. I felt that I had been mistaken,
anyway that I could do no more.
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>I went down again into the valley, crossed
the Kedron, and would have returned
here at once perhaps, but I was tired, and
so, on the slope where the olive-presses
are, I lay down and must have fallen
asleep, for I remembered nothing till
there came a tramping of men. I
crouched in the underbrush. They passed
very close; some had torches, some had
spears. Judas was leading, and as an ape
munches a flower he was muttering the
Master’s name.</q>
</p>

<p>
Eleazer paused and looked at his sister.
She was standing erect, her face
wan, the brow contracted, the rhymes of
her lips tight-pressed. Then, with a glance
at Olivet, he continued:
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">For a little space I waited. They had
ascended the slope and halted. There
was a shout, the waving of torches, then
a silence. In it I heard the Master’s
voice, followed by a cry of pain. I hurried
to where they were. They had him
bound when I got there. I saw a soldier
raising a hand to his ear and looking at
the palm; it was red. Peter was running
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>one way, Thomas another. I got nearer.
Some one, a levite I think, caught me by
the coat. I freed myself from it and escaped
up the hill.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">From there I looked down. They
were going away. When they had gone,
I went back and found my cloak. While
I was putting it on, John appeared.
<q>They are taking him to Caiaphas,</q> he
said; <q>I shall follow. Come with me if
you wish.</q> I went with him. On the way
we met Peter; he joined us. We walked
single-file, John leading. Beyond I could
see the lights of the torches, the glint of
steel. No one spoke. Peter whimpered
a little. We crossed the Kedron and got
up into the city. The soldiers went directly
to where Annas lives; they entered
in a body, and the door closed. John
rapped: it was opened. He said something
to the doorkeeper, who admitted him.
The door closed again. Peter and I
waited a little, not knowing where to turn.
Presently the door reopened, and John
motioned us to come in. In the court
was a fire; about it were servants and
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>khazzans. I stopped a moment to warm
my hands; Peter did the same. John
had disappeared. I heard one of the
khazzans say that they had taken the
Master to Annas, and the others discuss
what he would probably do. While I
stood there listening, and wondering what
had become of John, I saw the Master
being led across the court to the Lishcath
ha-Gazith. I left Peter, and followed.
In the hall were the elders, ranged in a
semicircle about Caiaphas. They must
have been prepared beforehand, for the
clerks of acquittal and of condemnation
were there, the crier too, and a group of
levites and Scribes. In a corner were
some of Annas’ servants. I got among
them and stood unnoticed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The Master’s hands were bound. On
either side of him was a soldier. Caiaphas
was livid. He looked him from head
to foot.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>You are accused,</q> he said, <q>of inciting
sedition, of defying the Law, of blasphemy,
and of breaking the Sabbath day.
What have you to answer?</q></q>
</p>

<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The Master made no reply.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Caiaphas pointed to the levites.
<q>Here,</q> he continued, <q>are witnesses.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">He motioned; one of them stepped
forward and spoke.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>I testify that this man has incited
to sedition by denouncing the members
of this reverend council as hypocrites,
wolves in sheep’s clothing, blind leaders
of the blind; and I further testify that he
has declared no one should follow them.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>What have you to say to that?</q>
Caiaphas snarled. But the Master said
nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The first levite moved back, and at
a gesture from the high-priest another
stepped forward.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>I testify that I have seen that man
eat, in defiance of the Law, with unwashed
hands, and consort with publicans and
people of low repute.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>And what have you to say to that?</q>
Caiaphas asked again. But still the
Master said nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The second levite moved back, and a
third advanced.</q>
</p>

<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>I testify that I have heard that man
blaspheme in calling God his father, and
in declaring himself to be one with Him.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>Is that blasphemy or is it not?</q>
Caiaphas bawled. But the Master’s lips
never moved.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The third levite gave way to a fourth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>I testify that that man has broken
the Sabbath in healing the sick on that
day, and further that he has seduced
others to break it. On the Sabbath I
have heard him order a cripple to take
up his bed and carry it to his home. I
have heard him also declare that he could
destroy the Temple and rebuild it, in
three days, anew.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Caiaphas turned to the Master. <q>Do
you still refuse to answer?</q> he asked.
<q>Do you think that silence can save you?
Have you heard these witnesses?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">And as the Master still made no reply,
Caiaphas lifted his hand and cried,
<q>I adjure you by the Eternal to answer,
Are you the Messiah, the Son of God?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">In the breathless silence Jesus raised
his eyes. He looked at the high-priest,
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>at the levites, the Scribes. <q>You have
said it,</q> he murmured, and smiled with
that air he has.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Caiaphas grew purple. He caught his
gown at the throat and ripped it from neck
to hem. The elders started. I heard
them mutter, <q><hi rend="italic">Ish maveth</hi>.</q> The high-priest
glanced toward them. <q>You have
heard this ragged blasphemy?</q> he exclaimed;
and, turning to where the Scribes
stood, <q>What,</q> he asked, <q>does the Law
decree concerning the Sabbath-breaker?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">One of them, the book unrolled in his
hand, advanced and read:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>Ye shall keep the Sabbath holy.
Whoso does any work thereon shall be
cut off from his people.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none"><q>And what of blasphemy?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The Scribe glanced at the roll and
repeated from memory: <q>He that blasphemeth
the name of the Lord shall be
put to death. The congregation shall
stone him, as well the stranger as he that
was born in the land.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Caiaphas closed the fingers on the
palm of his left hand, and, raising it,
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>turned again to the elders. <q><hi rend="italic">Ish maveth</hi>,</q>
they repeated, closing their fingers as he
had done.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I knew then that he was condemned.
After all</q>—and Eleazer looked wearily to
the ground—<q>it was legal enough. Each
moment I expected him to give some
sign, but, save to affirm the charge of blasphemy,
during the entire time he kept
silent. Yes, it was legal enough. From
where I stood I heard the Scribes say
that he would be sentenced at sunrise,
and then Pilate would have a word with
him. I could do nothing. Caiaphas
still fumed. I went out in the court
again. In the corridor was Judas. Peter
was wrangling with the servants. I
did not wait for more. I got away and
into the valley and up again on the hill.
A cock was crowing, and I saw the dawn.
O Mary, the pity of it!</q>
</p>

<p>
He looked at his sister. There was no
weakness now in her face, nor beauty
either. Age must have passed her in the
night.
</p>

<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>

<p>
<q>And I will have a word with Pilate
too,</q> she said.
</p>

<p>
As a somnambulist might, she drew her
mantle closer, and, moving to the wayside,
ascended the hill. The silver and green
of the olives closed around her, and with
them the branching dates. Above, a star
left by the morning glimmered feebly.
In a myrtle a bird began to sing, and a
lizard that had come out to intercept the
sun scurried as she passed. Upward
and onward still she went, and, the summit
reached, for a moment she stopped
and rested.
</p>

<p>
To the east the Dead Sea lay, a stretch
of silk. At its edge was the flutter of
ospreys feasting on the barbels and
breams of the Jordan, which as they enter,
die. Beyond was a glitter of white
and gold, the scarp of Moriah and its
breast of stone, the Tyrian bevel of Solomon,
the porphyry of Nehemiah, the marble
that Herod gave; ascending terraces,
engulfing porticoes, the splendor of Jerusalem
at dawn. Between the houses
nearest was the dimness that shadows
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>cast; those further away had a scatter of
pink; about it all was a wall surmounted
by turrets; beneath was a ravine in which
was a brook, and a city of booths and
tents, grazing camels and fat-tailed sheep.
</p>

<p>
Through the pines and cypresses Mary
passed down to where the olives were.
The brook sent a message to her; the
blood that had flowed from the sacrifices
was in it, and in the fresh morning it
reeked a little, as such brooks do. It was
here, she thought, the Master had been
taken, and for a second she stopped again.
The sun now was rising behind her; the
color of the sky shifted. Beyond Jerusalem
a mountain was melting in excesses
of vermilion, and the ravine that had been
gray was assuming the tenderest green.
The star had disappeared, but from each
tree broke the greeting of a bird.
</p>

<p>
A rustle of the leaves near by startled
her, and she looked about, fearful, as
women are, of some beast of prey. A
white robe was there, a white turban, and
beneath it the swart face of one whom
she had known.
</p>

<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>

<p>
To her eyes came massacres. <q>Judas!</q>
she exclaimed, and looked up in that roof
of her world where day puts its blue and
night puts its black. <q>Judas!</q> she repeated.
Her small hands clenched, and
the rhymes of her mouth grew venomous.
</p>

<p>
Then the woman spoke in her. <q>Why
did you not kill me first?</q>
</p>

<p>
Judas swayed like an ox hit on the
forehead. The motion distracted and irritated
her. <q>Can’t you speak,</q> she
cried, <q>or does hell hold you, tongue and
all?</q>
</p>

<p>
He raised a hand as though he feared
another blow. The gesture was so human
and yet so humble that Mary looked
into his face. Time, which turns the
sweet-eyed girl into a withered spectre,
must have touched him with its thumb.
His eyes were ringed and cavernous, his
cheeks empty.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have heard, then?</q> he said; but
he evinced no curiosity. He spoke with
the apathy of one who takes everything
for granted, one with whom fate is to
have its will. <q>I have just come from
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>there,</q> he added, with a backward gesture.
<q>I never thought that such a thing could
be. No, I swear it, I never did.</q> Then,
in answer perhaps to some inner twinge,
perhaps also because of the expression
of Mary’s lips, he continued: <q>If there
is a new oath, one that has never been
used before, prompt me, and I will swear
again, I never did. I thought——</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary interrupted him savagely:
<q>There are ten kinds of hypocrisy. You
have nine of them; you will develop the
tenth and invent a new one besides.</q>
</p>

<p>
At this Judas made a pass with his
hands and stared absently at the ground.
<q>Mary,</q> he said, <q>life is a book which
man reads when he dies. During the last
hour I have been unrolling it. In its scroll
I found existence a wine-shop where the
guest fares so badly that he would go at
once were it not that he fears to call for
the reckoning. The reckoning, Mary, is
death. I have called for it. I am about
to pay. Let me tell you. I have no excuse
to offer, no forgiveness now to await. My
heart was a meadow: you made it stone.
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>There were well-springs in it: you dried
them, Mary. When I first saw you, you
were a dream fulfilled. Others had brought
echoes of life; you brought its song. It
was then that I heard the Master speak.
I followed him, and tried to forget. It
must be that I failed, for when I saw you
in Capharnahum my blood danced, and
when you spoke I trembled. It was love,
Mary; and love, when it is not death, is
life. It was that I sought at your side.
You would not listen. Innocence is a
garment. You seemed to have wrapped
it about you. I tried to tear it away.
There was my fault, and this my punishment.
Your right was inflexible as a
prison-door, and yet always behind it was
the murmur of a mysterious Perhaps.
The others turned to me; I turned to you.
I forgot again, but this time it was my
duty, my allegiance, and my faith. Mary,
I loved the Master more wholly even than
I loved you. He was the Spirit; you
were the flesh. In him was the future; in
you the tomb. I thought to conquer both.
While I mixed my darkness with his light,
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>I pursued you as night pursues the day.
On the light I have cast a shadow, and to
you I have brought a blight. But, Mary,
both will disappear. The one consolation
I cling to now is that belief. When
I delivered him up, it was myself I betrayed,
not him. I am forever dead, and
he forever living. While I bargained
with the priests and pretended that my
aim was coin, when I led the levites and
the Temple-guard just here to where he
stood, during all the hours since I left
you, I tried to escape from that cage we
call Fate. Mary, there is something about
us higher than our will. The revenge I
sought on you forsook me before I reached
the city’s gate. It is the intangible that
has brought me where I am. I have
sworn to you I never thought this thing
could be. I swear it now again. In
carrying out the threat I made, I thought
to make you fear my hate and make him
greater than he was. His enemies, I had
seen, were many. Those that had believed
in him grew daily less. In Jerusalem his
miracles had ceased, and I thought that,
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>when the levites and the Temple-guard
approached, he would speak with Samuel’s
thunder, answer with Elijah’s flame.
I thought the stars would shake, the moon
grow red; that he would produce the lost
Urim, the vanished Ark, and so forever
silence disbelief. I was wrong, and he
was right. Belief is in the heart, not in
the senses; the visible contradicts, but
faith is not to be confuted. No, Mary,
the tombs are not dumb. I said so once,
I know, but they answer, and mine will
speak. On it perhaps a caricature may
be daubed, and about it prejudice will uncoil.
I deserve it. Yet though you think
me wholly base, remember no man is that.
Since I met you my life has been a battle-field
in which I have fought with conscience.
It has conquered. I am its
slave; it commands, and I obey.</q>
</p>

<p>
He drew a breath as though he had
more to add, and turned to where she
stood. There was no one there. From
an olive-branch a red-start piped to the
morning; over the buds of a pomegranate
a bee buzzed its delight; across the leaves
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>of a myrtle a blue spider was busy with
its web, but Mary was no longer there.
He peered through the underbrush, and
wandered to the grove beyond. There
was no one. He looked to the hill-top:
there was the advancing sun. He looked
in the valley: there were the pilgrims’
booths, the grazing camels and fat-tailed
sheep.
</p>

<p>
<q>She has gone,</q> he told himself. <q>She
would not even listen.</q>
</p>

<p>
He bent his head. For the first time
since boyhood the tears rolled down his
face.
</p>

<p>
<q>She might at least have heard me,</q> he
thought, and brushed the tears away.
Others came and replaced them. When
they had fallen, there were more.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, she might at least have listened.
If I had no excuse to offer, at least I had
regret.</q> For a moment he fancied her,
cruel as only woman is, hurrying to some
unknown goal. The tears he had tried
to stanch ceased now abruptly. <q>She is
right,</q> he mused. <q>She has left me to
conscience and to death.</q>
</p>

<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>

<p>
He turned again and went back to
where he had stood before. As he crossed
the intervening space he unloosed the
long girdle which he wore, and from which
still hung the treasury of the twelve.
The bag that held it fell where the bee
was buzzing. One end of the girdle
he tossed over a branch; the red-start
spread its wings and fled. He
looked about. There was a stone near by;
he got it and with a little labor rolled it
beneath the branch. Then he made a
noose, very carefully, that it might not
come undone, and settling it well under
the chin, he tied the other end of the
girdle to it and swung himself from the
stone.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER IX.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg198"/>

<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>

<head rend="page-break-before: right">IX.</head>

<p>
In the apartment of Claudia Procula,
Mary and the wife of the procurator
stood face to face.
</p>

<p>
The apartment itself overlooked Jerusalem.
Beneath was an open space tiled
with little oblong stones, red, yellow, and
blue; the blue predominating. On either
side the colossal white wings of the palace
stretched to a park, very green in the
sunlight, cut by colonnades in which
fountains were, and surrounded by a marble
wall that was starred with turrets and
fluttered with doves. The Temple, which,
from its cressets, radiated to the hills
beyond a glare of gold, was not as fair
nor yet as vast as this. Within its gates
an army could manœuvre; in its banquet-hall
a cohort could have supped. It was
Herod’s triumph, built subsequent to the
Temple, to show the world, perhaps, that
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>to surpass a masterpiece he had only to
conceive another.
</p>

<p>
To it now and then, for a week or more,
the procurator descended from his residence
by the sea. He preferred the
latter; the day was freer there, life less
cramped. But during festival times, when
the fanatic Jews were apt to be excited
and need the chill of a curb, it was well
for him and his soldiery to be on hand.
And so on this occasion he had come, and
with him his wife, Claudia Procula, and
the tetrarch Antipas, who had joined
them on the way.
</p>

<p>
Antipas and his retinue occupied the
Ægrippeum, the north wing of the palace,
while in the Cæsareum, the wing that
leaned to the south, was Pilate, his wife
and body-guard.
</p>

<p>
And now on this clear morning the
sweet-faced patrician, Claudia Procula,
with perfectly feminine curiosity was
looking into the drawn features of the
Magdalen, and wondering whence her
rumored charm could come.
</p>

<p>
<q>I will do my best,</q> she said, at last, in
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>answer to an anterior request. And calling
a servant, she wrote on a tablet a
word for Pilate’s eye.
</p>

<p>
Mary moved to the portico. The variegated
tiles of the quadrangle were nearly
covered now. A flight of wide, low
steps led to the main entrance of the palace,
and there a high seat of enamelled
ebony had been placed. In it Pilate sat,
in his hand the staff of office. Beside
him were his assessors, members of his
suite, and Calcol, a centurion. On one of
the steps Caiaphas stood, near him the
elders of the college. Below was the
Christ, bound and guarded. Across the
quadrangle was a line of soldiery, behind
it a mob.
</p>

<p>
The helmets, glancing mail, short
skirts, and bare legs of the Romans contrasted
refreshingly with the blossoming
garments, effeminate girdles, frontlets, and
horned blue bonnets of the priesthood.
And in the riot of color and glint of steel
the Christ, bound as he was, looked, in
the simplicity of his seamless robe, the
descendant of a larger sphere. Above,
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>to the left, Antipas, aroused by the clamor,
leaned from a portico. Opposite
where the sunlight fell Mary held her
cloak about her.
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas, a hand indicating Jesus, his
head turned to Pilate, was formulating a
complaint. Not indeed that the prisoner
had declared himself a divinity. There
were far too many gods in the menagerie
of the Pantheon for a procurator to be
the least disturbed at the rumor of a new
one. It was the right to rule, that attribute
of the Messiah, on which he intended
the gravamen of the charge should rest.
But he began circuitously, feeling the
way, in Greek at that, with an accent
which might have been improved.
</p>

<p>
<q>And so,</q> he concluded, <q>in many
ways he has transgressed the Law.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why don’t you judge him by it,
then?</q> asked Pilate, grimly.
</p>

<p>
A servant approached with a tablet.
The procurator glanced at it, looked up
at the man, and motioned him away.
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord governor, we have. The
Sanhedrim, having found him guilty, has
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>sentenced him to death. But the Sanhedrim,
as you know, may not execute the
sentence. The Senate has deprived us of
that right. It is for you, as its legate, to
order it done.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate sneered. <q>I can’t very well,
until I know of what he is guilty. What
crime has he committed—written a letter
on the Sabbath, or has he been caught
without his phylacteries?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He has declared himself Israel’s
king!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> And Pilate smiled wearily.
<q>You are always expecting one; why not
take him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not, my lord? Because it is
treason to do so.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate nodded with affected approval.
<q>I admire your zeal.</q> And with a glance
at the prisoner, he added: <q>You have
heard the accusation; defend yourself.
What!</q> he continued, after a moment,
<q>have you nothing to say?</q>
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas exulted openly. The corners
of his mouth had the width and cruelty,
and his nostrils the dilation, of a wolf.
</p>

<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> he cried, <q>his silence is an
admission.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hold your tongue! It is for me to
question.</q> And therewith Pilate gave
the high-priest a look which was tantamount
to a knee pressed on the midriff.
He glanced again at the tablet, then at
the prisoner.
</p>

<p>
<q>Tell me, do you really claim to be
king?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it your idea of me?</q> the Christ
asked; and in his bearing was a dignity
which did not clash with the charge;
<q>or have others prompted you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I am not a Jew,</q> Pilate retorted.
<q>The matter only interests me officially.
It is your hierarchy that bring the
charge. Why have they? What have
you done? Tell me,</q> he continued, in
Latin, <q>do you think yourself King?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend="italic">Tu dixisti</hi>,</q> Jesus answered, and smiled
as he had before, very gravely. <q>But my
royalty is not of the earth.</q> And with
a glance at his bonds, one which was so
significant that it annulled the charge, he
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>added, still in Latin, <q>I am Truth, and I
preach it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate with skeptical indulgence shook
his head. Truth to him was an elenchicism,
an abstraction of the Platonists,
whom in Rome he had respected for their
wisdom and avoided with care. He turned
to Caiaphas. The latter had been regretting
the absence of an interpreter.
This amicable conversation, which he did
not understand, was not in the least to
his liking, and as Pilate turned to him
he frowned in his beard.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am unable to find him guilty,</q> the
procurator announced. <q>He may call
himself king, but every philosopher does
the same. You might yourself, for that
matter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A philosopher, this mesîth!</q> Caiaphas
gnashed back. <q>Why, he seduces the
people; he incites to sedition; he is a
rebel to Rome. It is for you, my lord,
to see the empire upheld. Would it be
well to have another complaint laid before
the Cæsar? Ask yourself, is this
Galilean worth it?</q>
</p>

<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>

<p>
The thrust was as keen and as venomous
as the tooth of a rat. Pilate had
been rebuked by the emperor already;
he had no wish to incur further displeasure.
Sejanus, the emperor’s favorite,
to whom he owed his procuratorship,
had for suspected treason been strangled
in a dumb dungeon only a little before.
Under Tiberius there was quiet, a future
historian was to note; and Pilate was
aware that, should a disturbance occur,
the disturbance would be quelled, but at
his expense.
</p>

<p>
An idea presented itself. <q>Did I understand
you to say he is a Galilean?</q> he
asked.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> Caiaphas answered, expecting,
perhaps, the usual jibe that was flung at
those who came from there. <q>Yes, he is
a Nazarene.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Hm. In that case I have no jurisdiction.
The tetrarch is my guest; take
your prisoner to him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord,</q> the high-priest objected,
<q>our law is such that if we enter the
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>palace we cannot officiate at the Passover
to-night.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate appeared to reflect. <q>I suppose,</q>
he said at last, <q>I might ask him
whether he would care to come here. In
which case,</q> he added, with a gesture of
elaborate courtesy, <q>you may remain uncontaminated
where you are. Ressala!</q>
</p>

<p>
An official stepped forward; an order
was given; he disappeared. Presently a
massive throne of sandalwood and gold
was trundled out. Caiaphas had seen it
before, and in it—Herod.
</p>

<p>
<q>The justice that comes from there,</q>
he muttered, <q>is as a snake that issues
from a tomb.</q>
</p>

<p>
His words were drowned in the clamors
of the crowd. The sun had crossed the
zenith; in its rays the waters that gushed
from the fountain-mouths of bronze lions
fell in rainbows and glistened in great
basins that glistened too. There was
sunlight everywhere, a sky of untroubled
blue, and from the Temple beyond came
a glare that radiated from Olivet to Bethlehem.
</p>

<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>

<p>
Pilate was bored. The mantle which
Mary wore caught his eye, and he looked
at her, wondering how she came in his
wife’s apartment, and where he had seen
her before. Her face was familiar, but
the setting vague. Then at once he remembered.
It was at Machærus he had
seen her, gambling with the emir, while
Salomè danced. She was with Antipas,
of course. He looked again; she had
gone.
</p>

<p>
The Sanhedrim consulted nervously.
The new turn of affairs was not at all to
their liking. The clamors of the mob
continued. Once a fanatic pushed against
a soldier. There was a thud, a howl, and
a mouth masked with liquid red gasped
to the sun and was seen no more.
</p>

<p>
Behind the procurator came a movement.
The officials massed about the
entrance parted in uneven ranks, and
in the great vestibule beyond, Antipas
appeared. Pilate rose to greet him. The
elders made obeisance. The tetrarch
moved forward and seated himself in his
father’s throne. At his side was Pahul,
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>the butler, balancing himself flamingowise
on one leg, his bold eyes foraging
the priests.
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas formulated the complaint
anew, very majestically this time, and,
thinking perhaps to overawe the tetrarch,
his voice assumed the authority of a
guardian of the keys of heaven, a chamberlain
of the sceptres of the earth.
</p>

<p>
Antipas ignored him utterly. He
plucked at his fan-shaped beard, and
stared at the Christ. He could see now
he bore no resemblance to Iohanan.
There was nothing of the hyena about
him, nor of the prophet either. Evidently
he was but a harmless vagabond, skilled
in simples, if report were true; perhaps
a thaumaturge. And it was he whom he
had feared and fancied might be that Son
of David for whom a star was created,
whom the magi had visited, whom his
father had sought to destroy, and whom
now from his father’s own throne he himself
was called upon to judge! He shook
his head, and in the sunlight the indigo
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>with which his hair was powdered made
bright blue motes.
</p>

<p>
<q>I say——</q>
</p>

<p>
Just beyond, where the assessors stood,
Mary suddenly appeared. He stopped
abruptly; for more than a year he had
not seen her. Pahul had told him
she had gone to Rome. If she had, he
reflected, the journey had not improved
her appearance. Then for the moment
he dismissed her, and returned to the
Christ.
</p>

<p>
<q>See here: somebody the other day
told me you worked miracles. I have
wanted to see one all my life. Gratify
me, won’t you? Oh, something very easy
to begin with. Send one of the guards up
in the air, or turn your bonds into bracelets.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Christ did not seem to hear. Pahul
laughed and held to the throne for
support. Antipas shrugged his shoulders.
</p>

<p>
<q>He looks harmless enough,</q> he said.
<q>Why not let him go?</q>
</p>

<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>

<p>
Caiaphas glowered, and his fingers
twitched. <q>He claims to be king!</q>
</p>

<p>
At this statement the tetrarch laughed
too. He gave an order to Pahul, who
vanished with a grin.
</p>

<p>
<q>He has jeered at the Temple your
father built,</q> Caiaphas continued. <q>He
has declared he could destroy it and
rebuild a better one, in three days at
that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He is king, then, but of fools.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And he has called you a fox,</q> Caiaphas
added, significantly.
</p>

<p>
<q>He doesn’t claim to be one himself,
does he?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He is guilty of treason, and it is for
you, his ruler, to sentence him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not I. The blood of kings is sacred.
Pahul, make haste!</q>
</p>

<p>
The butler, reappearing, held in his
hand the glittering white vestment of a
candidate. The tetrarch took it and held
it in air.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here, put this on him, and let his
subjects admire him to their hearts’
content.</q>
</p>

<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>

<p>
<q>Antipas, you disgrace your purple!</q>
</p>

<p>
At the exclamation, the Sanhedrim, the
guards, the assessors, the officials, Pilate
himself, everyone save the prisoner,
turned and looked. On the colored pavement
Mary stood, her face very pale.
</p>

<p>
The tetrarch flushed mightily; anger
mounted into his shifting eyes. For a
moment the sky was blood-red; then he
recovered himself and answered lightly:
</p>

<p>
<q>It seems to me, my dear, that you
take things with a high hand. It may be
that you forget yourself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I take them from where I am,</q> she
cried. <q>As for forgetfulness, remember
that my grandfather was satrap of Syria,
my father after him, while yours——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, I dare say. He is not in
power now; I am.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Not here, Antipas, nor in Rome. I
appeal to Pilate.</q>
</p>

<p>
The tetrarch rose from the throne.
The elders whispered together. Pilate
visibly was perplexed. Remembering
Mary as he did, he looked upon the incident
as a family quarrel, one in which it
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>would be unseemly for him to interfere,
and which none the less disturbed the
decorum of his court.
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas edged up to the tetrarch, but
the latter brushed him aside.
</p>

<p>
<q>The hetaira is right,</q> he exclaimed.
<q>I am not in power here. If I were, she
should be lapidated.</q>
</p>

<p>
And, preceded by the butler, Antipas
passed through the parting ranks to the
vestibule beyond.
</p>

<p>
The perplexity of the procurator increased.
He did not in the least understand.
To him Mary stood in the same
relation to Antipas that Cleopatra had to
Herod. There had been a feud between
the tetrarch and himself, one recently
mended, and which he had no wish to
renew. Yet manifestly Antipas was aggrieved,
and his own path in the matter
by no means clear.
</p>

<p>
<q>Bah!</q> he muttered, in the consoling
undertone of thought, <q>what are their
beastly barbarian manners to me?</q>
</p>

<p>
These reflections Caiaphas interrupted.
</p>

<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>

<p>
<q>We are waiting, my lord, for the sentence
to be pronounced.</q>
</p>

<p>
The tone he used was not, however,
indicative of patience, and in conjunction
with the incident that had just occurred
it irritated and jarred. Besides, Pilate
did not care to be prompted. It was for
him to speak first. He strangled an oath,
and, gathering some fringe of the majesty
of Rome, he announced very measuredly:
</p>

<p>
<q>You have brought this man before
me as a rebel. I have examined him and
find no ground for the charge. His ruler,
the tetrarch, has also examined him, and
by him too he has been acquitted. But
in view of the fact that he appears to have
contravened some one or another of your
laws I order him to be scourged and to
be liberated.</q>
</p>

<p>
With that he turned to the prisoner.
During the entire proceedings the attitude
of Jesus had not altered. He stood as a
disinterested spectator might—one whom
chance had brought that way and there
hemmed in—his eyes on remote,
inacces<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>sible horizons, the tongue silent, the head
a little raised.
</p>

<p>
<q>Scourging, my lord,</q> Caiaphas interjected,
<q>is fit and proper, but,</q> he continued,
one silk-gloved hand uplifted,
<q>our law prescribes death. Only an
enemy to Tiberius would prevent it.</q>
</p>

<p>
At the veiled menace Pilate gnawed
his under lip. He had no faith at all in
the loyalty of the hierarch; at any other
time the affection the latter manifested
for the chains he bore would have been
ludicrous and nothing else. But at the
moment he felt insecure. There were
Galileans whom he had sacrificed, Judæans
whom he had slaughtered, Samaritans
whom he had oppressed, an embassy
might even now be on its way to
Rome; he thought again of Sejanus, and,
with cause, he hesitated. Yet of the inward
perturbation he gave no outward
sign.
</p>

<p>
<q>On this day,</q> he said at last, <q>it is
customary that in commemoration of
your nation’s delivery out of Egypt I
should release a prisoner to you. There
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>are three others here, among them Jesus
Barabba.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then, for support perhaps, he looked
over at the clamoring mob.
</p>

<p>
<q>I will leave the choice to the people.</q>
</p>

<p>
A wind seemed to raise the elders;
they scattered through the court like
leaves. <q>Have done with the Nazarene,</q>
cried one. <q>He would lead you astray,</q>
insinuated another. <q>He has violated
the Law,</q> exclaimed a third.
</p>

<p>
And, filtering through the soldiery into
the mob without, they exhorted and
prayed and coerced. <q>Ask for Barabba;
denounce the blasphemer. Trust to the
Sanhedrim. We are your guides. Let
him atone for his crimes. The God of
your fathers commands that you condemn.
Demand Barabba; uphold your
nation. To the cross with the Nazarene!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Whom do you choose?</q> shouted
Pilate.
</p>

<p>
And the pleb of Jerusalem shouted
back as one man, <q>Barabba!</q>
</p>

<p>
At the moment Pilate fancied himself
in an amphitheatre, the arena filled with
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>beasts. There were the satin and stripes
of the panther, the yellow of treacherous
eyes, the gnash of fangs, the guttural
rumble, the deafening yell, the scent of
blood, and above, the same blue tender
sky.
</p>

<p>
<q>What of the prisoner?</q> he called.
</p>

<p>
A roar leapt back. <q>Sekaph! Sekaph!
Let him be crucified.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate had fronted a rabble before, and
in two minutes had turned that rabble
into so many dead flies, the legs in the
air. He shook his head, and told himself
he was not there to be coerced.
</p>

<p>
<q>Release Barabba,</q> he ordered. <q>And
as for the prisoner, take him to the barracks
and have him scourged.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Brute!</q> cried a voice that lifted him
as a blow might from his ebony chair.
<q>Pilate, though you are a plebeian, why
show yourself a slave?</q>
</p>

<p>
And Mary, with the strength of anger,
brushed through the encircling officials
and towered before him, robed in wrath.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, permit me,</q> he answered; <q>you
are singularly unjust.</q>
</p>

<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>

<p>
<q>Prove me so, and countermand the
order that you gave.</q>
</p>

<p>
As she spoke she adjusted her mantle,
which had become disarranged, and looked
him from head to foot, measuring him as it
were, and finding him, visibly, very small.
</p>

<p>
Already the prisoner had been led
away, and beyond, in the barracks, was
the whiz of jagged leather that lacerated,
rebounded, and lacerated again.
</p>

<p>
<q>I will not,</q> he answered. <q>What I
have ordered, I have ordered. As for
you——</q>
</p>

<p>
There had come to her that look which
sibyls have. <q>Pilate,</q> she interrupted,
<q>you are powerful here, I know, but</q>—and
her hand shot out like an arrow
from a bow—<q>over there vultures are
circling; in your power is a corpse.
What the vultures scent, I see.</q>
</p>

<p>
So abrupt and earnest was the gesture
that unconsciously Pilate found himself
looking to where she seemed to point.
He lowered his eyes in vexation.
Wrangling with a woman was not to
his taste.
</p>

<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>

<p>
<q>There, there,</q> he said, much as one
might to a fretful child; <q>don’t throw
stones.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have but one; it is Justice, and that
I keep to hurl at you.</q>
</p>

<p>
The procurator’s mouth twitched ominously.
<q>My dear,</q> he said, <q>you are
too pretty to talk that way; it spoils the
looks. Besides, I have no time to listen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tiberius has and will.</q>
</p>

<p>
Pilate nodded; it was the third time
he had heard the threat that day.
</p>

<p>
<q>There are many rooms in his palace,</q>
he answered, with covert significance.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, I know it. There are many, as
you say. But there is one I will enter.
On the door stands written The Future,
and behind it, Pilate, is your death.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Roman, goaded to exasperation,
sprang to his feet. An expression which
Antipas had used occurred to him.
<q>Away with the hetaira,</q> he cried; and
he was about, it may be, to order her to
be tossed to the fierce wild swine in the
paddocks of the park when the prisoner
and his guards reappeared on the
tessel<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>lated pavement, and Mary, already
dragged from him, was instantly forgot.
</p>

<p>
A tattered sagum, which had once been
scarlet, but which had faded since, hung,
detained at the shoulder by a rusty
buckle, and bordered by a laticlave, loosely
about his form. In his hand a bulrush
swayed; on his head was a twisted coil of
bear’s-breech, in which, among the ruffled
leaves, one bud remained; it was white,
the opening edges flecked with pink,
perhaps with blood, for from the temples
and about the ear a rill ran down and
mixed with the purple of the laticlave
below. And in this red parody of kingship
the Christ stood, unmoved as a
phantom, but in his face and eyes there
was a projecting light so luminous, so
intangible, and yet so real, that the skeptical
procurator started, the staff of office
pendent in his grasp.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ecce homo!</q> he exclaimed. Instinctively
he drew back, and, wonderingly,
half to himself, half to the Christ, <q>Who
are you?</q> he asked.
</p>

<p>
<q>A flame below, a soul above,</q> Jesus
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>answered, yet so inaudibly that the guards
beside him did not catch the words.
</p>

<p>
To Pilate his lips had barely moved,
and his wonderment increased. <q>Why
do you not answer?</q> he said. <q>You
must know that I have the power to condemn
and to acquit.</q>
</p>

<p>
With that gentleness that was the flower
of his parables Jesus raised his voice.
<q>No,</q> he replied, <q>you can have no power
against me unless it come from above.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again Pilate drew back. Unsummoned
to his lips had sprung the words, <q>Behold
the man!</q> and now he exclaimed, <q>Behold
the king!</q>
</p>

<p>
But to the mob the vision he intercepted
was lost. They saw the jest merely,
and with it the stains that torture leaves.
The sight of blood is heady; it inebriates
more surely than wine. The mob, trained
by the elders, and used by them as a
body-guard, fanatic before, were intoxicated
now. With one accord they shrieked
the liturgy again.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sekaph! Sekaph! Let him be crucified.</q>
</p>

<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>

<p>
In that gust of hatred Pilate recovered.
He turned to Caiaphas:
</p>

<p>
<q>I have released one prisoner; I will
release another too.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My lord, be warned by one who is
your elder.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>One whom I can remove.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No doubt, my lord; but suffer him
while he may to warn you not to cause a
revolution on the day of the Paschal feast.
You hear that multitude. Then be
warned.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But your feast is one of mercy.</q>
</p>

<p>
The high-priest gazed curiously at his
silk-gloved hands. You would have said
they were objects he had never seen before.
Then he returned the procurator’s
stare.
</p>

<p>
<q>We know of no such god.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah!</q> And the procurator drew a
long breath of understanding. <q>It is that,
I believe, he preaches.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And it is for that,</q> Caiaphas echoed,
<q>that he must die. Yes, Pilate, it is for
that. There is no such doctrine in the
Pentateuch. We have done our duty.
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>We have convicted a rebel of his guilt.
We have brought him to you, and we demand
his sentence. Pilate, it is not so
very long ago you had hundreds massacred
without judgment, without trial
either, and for what?—for one rebellious
cry. You must have a reason for the
favor you show this man. It would interest
me to learn it; it would interest
Tiberius as well. Listen to that multitude.
If you pay no heed to our accusation nor
yet to their demand, on you the consequences
rest. We are absolved.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He is your king,</q> the procurator objected,
meditatively.
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas wheeled like a feather a breeze
has caught. One hand outstretched he
held to the mob, with the other he pointed
to the Christ.
</p>

<p>
<q>Our king!</q> he cried. <q>The procurator
says he is our king!</q>
</p>

<p>
As the thunder peals, a roar surged
back:
</p>

<p>
<q>We have no other king than Cæsar.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Think of Sejanus,</q> the high-priest
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>suggested. The thrust was so well timed
it told.
</p>

<p>
Pilate looked sullenly about. <q>Fetch
me water,</q> he ordered.
</p>

<p>
A silver bowl was brought, and borrowing
a custom from the Jews he loathed, he
dipped his fingers in it.
</p>

<p>
<q>I wash my hands of it all,</q> he muttered.
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas looked at the elders and
sighed with infinite relief. He had conquered.
For the first time that day he
smiled. He became gracious also, and he
bowed.
</p>

<p>
<q>The blood be upon us, my lord, and
on our children. Will you give the
order?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Calcol!</q>
</p>

<p>
The centurion approached. An order
was given him in an undertone, and as he
turned to the guards, Pilate drew the staff
of office across his knee, snapped it in
two, tossed the pieces to the ground, and
through the ranks of his servitors passed
on into the great blue vestibule beyond.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
<index index="toc"/><index index="pdf"/>
<head>CHAPTER X.</head>

<pb/><anchor id="Pg226"/>

<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>

<head rend="page-break-before: right">X.</head>

<p>
In a sook near the Gannath Gate Mary
stood. In the distance the palace of
Herod defied the sun. Beyond the gate
lay the Hennom Valley, the Geia Hennom,
contracted by the people into Ge’
Hennom, or Gehenna, and converted by
them into a sewer, a place where carrion
was thrown, and the filth of a great city.
In earlier days children had been immolated
to Moloch there, human victims had
been burned; it was a place accursed, and
to purify the air, as a safeguard against
pestilence, the offal was consumed by
bonfires that were constantly renewed
and never extinguished. At its extremity
was an elevation, a hilly contour which
to the popular fancy suggested a skull.
To the west it fell steeply away. It was
called Gülgolta.
</p>

<p>
The sook in which Mary stood was
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>affected by shoemakers. Against the
dwelling of one of them she leaned. The
mantle was gone from her now, and the
olive robe had a rent, but the splendor of
her hair fell unconfined, the perils of her
eyes had increased; yet in their depths
where love had been was hate. One arm
lay along the resisting stone, the other
hung at her side; her face was turned to
the palace, her thin nostrils quivering, her
breath coming and going with that spasmodic
irregularity which the consciousness
of outrage brings. She laid it all to
Judas; he must have returned to Kerioth,
she thought. The sook itself was silent,
stirred merely by some echo of the uproar
in the palace beyond.
</p>

<p>
From a grilled lattice near by an old
man peered out. He had the restless
eyes of a ferret, and a white beard that
was very long. He too was looking toward
the palace. Now and then he muttered
inaudibly in Aramaic to himself.
In the shadow of a neighboring house a
woman appeared; he shook at the lattice
as an ape does at the bars of a cage, and
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>spat a bestial insult at her. The woman
shrank back. Instinctively Mary turned.
In the retreating figure she recognized
Ahulah, and at once, without conscious
effort, she divined that the dwelling
against which she leaned was that of Baba
Barbulah, the husband of the woman
whom the Master had declined to condemn.
</p>

<p>
But other things possessed her—the
outrage to the Christ, perplexity as to
how the trial would result, more remotely
the indignity to herself, the slurs of the
tetrarch and of the procurator; and with
them, sapping her heart as fever might,
was that thirst for reparation, unquenchable
in its intensity, which comes to those
who have seen their own life wrecked and
its ideals dispersed.
</p>

<p>
Already Ahulah was forgot. On the
wings of vagabond fancy she was in Rome,
demanding vengeance of Tiberius, wresting
it from him by the sheer force of entreaty,
and with it exulting in the death-throes
of the procurator. Oh, to see his
nails pulled out, his outer skin removed,
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>his tongue severed, his eyes seared with
irons, his wrists slowly twisted till they
snapped! to hear him cry for mercy! to
promise it and not fulfil!—dear God, what
joy was there!
</p>

<p>
From the alley into which Ahulah had
shrunk a man issued. He was sturdy as
a bludgeon, and he had a growth of thick
black hair that curled about an honest
face. In his hand was a basket. At the
sight of Mary his steps hesitated, and his
eyes followed hers to where the palace
lay. Then he crossed the zigzag of the
intervening space, but he had to touch
her outstretched arm before she noticed
him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Simon!</q> she exclaimed, with that
start one has when suddenly awaked.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Simon indeed;</q> and through the
silence of the sook his clear laugh rang.
<q>I frightened you, did I not?</q>
</p>

<p>
Mary interrupted him. <q>Haven’t you
heard? Has not Eleazer told you——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>When I left Bethany he was sleeping
with both fists closed. Martha——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Master is arrested. Last night
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>he was before the Sanhedrim; he is before
the procurator now.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hurriedly Mary gave an account of
what had occurred. As the recital continued,
Simon’s expression grew darker
than his curling hair, he clutched at the
basket which he held, so tightly that the
handle severed, the basket fell, and fruit
that imprisoned the sunlight rolled on
the ground.
</p>

<p>
<q>They were for the Master,</q> he said.
<q>I thought he would sup with us to-night.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He may do so yet,</q> she answered.
<q>Perhaps——</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Never!</q> cried a voice from the lattice.
<q>They are leading him to Gülgolta now.</q>
</p>

<p>
Beyond, through the palace gate, a
mass undulated, the body elongated, expanding
as it moved. It was black, but
at the sides was the glisten that cobras
have. About it dust circled, and from it
came the rumble of thunder heard afar.
As the bulk increased, the roar deepened;
the black lessened into varying
hues. To the glisten came the glint of
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>steel; the cobra changed into a multitude,
the escort of a squad of soldiery,
fronted by a centurion and led by the
banner of Imperial Rome.
</p>

<p>
Behind the centurion, Jesus, in his
faded sagum, staggered, overweighted
by the burden of a cross. Two comrades
in misery were at his side, but
they moved with steadier step, bearing
their crosses with the brawn of muscular
and untired arms. The soldiers marched
impassibly, preceding the executioners—four
stalwart Cypriotes, distinguishable
by the fatness of their calves—while
behind was the Sanhedrim, and, extending
indefinitely to the rear, the rabble of
yelling Jews.
</p>

<p>
In a cobra’s coils is death, its eyes
transfix. Neither Mary nor Simon had
spoken, and now, as the soldiery was
upon them, they leaned yet nearer the
wall. For a moment Mary hid her face.
At her feet the Christ had fallen, and
from her came one wail, choked down at
once. She stooped to aid him, but he
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>stood up unassisted and reached to the
wall for support.
</p>

<p>
The bars of the lattice shook; the old
man peered out.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don’t touch my house, you vagabond!
Move on!</q> he cried.
</p>

<p>
Calcol had turned to Simon, who was
raising the cross. <q>Carry it for him,</q> he
commanded.
</p>

<p>
Baba Barbulah still shook at the lattice.
<q>Move on!</q> he repeated. <q>Seducer
of the people, remitter of sins, upholder
of adultery, move on; don’t touch my
house, it will fall down on you! Move
on, I say!</q>
</p>

<p>
Calcol’s command Simon had anticipated.
He shouldered the cross. It was
heavier to him than to the Christ, not in
weight, perhaps, but in purpose. In the
narrowness of the sook the crowd was
impeded, but from the rear they pushed,
surprised at the halt.
</p>

<p>
Mary sprang at the lattice. <q>It is you
that shall move on,</q> she cried; <q>yes,
you; and forever. The desert will call
to you, <q>March;</q> and the sea will snarl,
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/><q>Further yet.</q> The gates of cities will
deny you, and the doors of hamlets be
closed. The eagles may return to their
eyrie, the panthers retreat to their lair,
but you will have no home, no rest, and,
till time dies, no tomb.</q>
</p>

<p>
The old man gnashed back at her an
insult more bestial than he used before,
and spat at her through the bars. But
Mary had turned to the Christ. He was
surrounded now by some women who
had filtered through the alley above.
Johanna, Mary Clopas, the wife of Zebdia,
and Bernice, a fragile girl newly enrolled.
The latter was wiping from his
face the stains of blood and dust. The
others were beating their breasts, crying
aloud.
</p>

<p>
Of the disciples there was no trace, nor
yet of any of those who had greeted him
as the Messiah. It may be that the admiring
throngs that had gathered about
him had faded before a superior force.
It may be they had lost heart, belief
perhaps as well. Invective never propitiates.
Recently he had omitted to
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>prophesy, he argued. The exquisite
parables with which he had been wont
to charm even the recalcitrant seemed to
have been put aside, and with them those
wonders which rumor held him to have
worked. But now that pathos and grace
which endeared, that perfection of sentiment
and expression which exalted the
heart, returned to him, accentuated perhaps
by the agonies he had endured.
</p>

<p>
<q>Weep for me no more,</q> he entreated.
<q>But weep for yourselves and for your
children. The days are coming,</q> he
added, with a gesture at the impatient
mob—<q>the days are coming in which
they shall say to the mountains, Fall on
us; to the hills, Cover us. For if these
things are done in the green tree, what
will be done in the dry?</q>
</p>

<p>
And in this entreaty, in which he exhorted
them to view disaster otherwise
than from the external and evanescent
aspect, the voice of the prophet rang
once more.
</p>

<p>
Mary as yet had not realized the full
portent of the soldiery and the mob.
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>When it was approaching it had occurred
to her that it might be another triumphal
escort, such as she had once seen surround
him on his way to a feast. As it
advanced, the roar bewildered, and she
had ceased to conjecture; then the Master
had fallen, and the old Jew had vomited
his slime. At the moment it was that, and
that only, which had impressed her, and
she had answered with the force of that
new strength which suddenly she had
found. But now at the sight of the
women beating their breasts, and the
blood-stained face of the Master, an inkling
came to her; she stared open-mouthed
at the cross, at Calcol, and at
the executioners that were there.
</p>

<p>
Then immediately that horrible longing
to know the worst beset her, and she
darted to where the centurion stood.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it?</q> she gasped. <q>What are
you to do with him?</q>
</p>

<p>
By way of answer Calcol extended his
arms straight out from either side, his
head thrown back. He was a good-natured
ruffian, with clear and pleasant eyes.
</p>

<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>

<p>
<q>Not crucify?</q> she cried. <q>Tell me, it
is not that?</q>
</p>

<p>
Calcol nodded. To him one Jew more,
one Jew less, was immaterial, provided
he had his pay, and the prospect of a return
to Rome was not too long delayed.
Yet none the less in some misty way he
wondered why this woman, with her
splendid hair and scorching eyes, should
have upbraided the tetrarch and abused
the procurator because of the friendless
Galilean whom he was leading to the
cross. Woman to him, however, was, as
she has been to others wiser than he, an
enigma he failed to solve. And so he
nodded merely, not unkindly, and smiled
in Mary’s face.
</p>

<p>
The horrible longing now was stilled.
She knew the worst; yet as the knowledge
of it penetrated her being, it seemed to
her as though it could not be true, that
she was the plaything of some hallucination,
her mind inhabited by a nightmare
from which she must presently awake.
The howl of the impatient mob undeceived
her. It was real; it was actual;
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>it was life. She stared at Calcol, her fair
mouth agape. There were many things
she wanted to say; her thoughts teemed
with arguments, her mind with persuasions;
but she could utter nothing; she
was as one struck dumb; and it was not
until the centurion smiled that the spell
dissolved and the power of speech returned.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, <hi rend="italic">that</hi> never; you shall kill me
first!</q> she cried. And already she saw
herself circumventing the centurion, blinding
the soldiery, defying the mob, and
leading the Master through byways and
underground passages out of the accursed
city into the fresh glades of Gethsemane,
over the hill, down the hollows
to the Jordan, and into the desert beyond.
There was one spot she knew
very well; one that only a bird could
find; one that she would mention to no
one, but to which she could take him and
keep him hidden there in the brakes till
night came, and the fording of the river
was safe.
</p>

<p>
<q>That never!</q> she cried. And
brush<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>ing Bernice off, she caught the Master by
the cloak. <q>Come with me,</q> she murmured.
<q>I know a way——</q>
</p>

<p>
And she would have dragged him perhaps,
regardless of the others, but the
centurion had her by the arm.
</p>

<p>
<q>See here, my pretty friend, your place
is not here.</q>
</p>

<p>
With a twist he sent her spinning back
to Baba Barbulah’s wall.
</p>

<p>
<q>March!</q> he ordered.
</p>

<p>
The soldiery, disarranged, fell in line.
The two robbers picked up their burden.
The Master turned to Mary, to the others
as well, with that expression which he
alone possessed, that look which both
promised and assuaged, and, it may be,
would have said some word of encouragement,
but Mary was at his side again,
her hand upon his cloak.
</p>

<p>
<q>It shall never be,</q> she repeated.
<q>They must kill me first.</q>
</p>

<p>
Calcol wheeled. His short sword
glistened, reversed, and her cheek was
laid open by the hilt. She staggered
back. The soldiery moved on. The
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>women surrounded her and stanched the
wound. To her the blow held the difference
between a cut and a cancer; she
knew that it could never heal; and, as the
blood poured down her face, for the first
time she divined the uselessness of revolt.
</p>

<p>
Presently a wave of the mob caught
her, separating her from the other women,
and carrying her in its eddy through
the gate, into the valley and on to the
hillock beyond. On one side were the
glimmer of fires, the smell of smoke, of
offal too. On the infrequent trees vultures
perched. To the right was a nest
of gardens and of tombs.
</p>

<p>
In the eddies Mary lost foothold and
lagged a little to the rear. When she
reached Gülgolta the soldiery had formed
three sides of a square. In it were the
executioners, the prisoners, and the centurion.
At the place where a fourth side
might have been a steep decline began.
</p>

<p>
Within the square three crosses lay;
before them the prisoners stood, stripped
of their clothing now, and naked.
</p>

<p>
The Sanhedrim was grouped about
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>that side of the square which leaned to
the south, the horned bonnet of Caiaphas
towering its lacework above the others.
To the wide and cruel corners of his
mouth had come the calm of a cheetah
devouring its prey. At the outer angle,
to the right, the standard of the empire
swayed; and from an oak two vultures
soared with a scream into the air, their
eyes fixed on the vision of bare white
flesh.
</p>

<p>
Through the ranks an elder passed. In
his hand was a gourd, which he offered to
one of the thieves.
</p>

<p>
<q>Drink of it, Dysmas,</q> he invited.
<q>In it grains of frankincense have been
dissolved.</q>
</p>

<p>
To the rear Annas nodded his approval.
His lean, lank jaws parted. <q>Give strong
drink,</q> he announced, authoritatively;
<q>give strong and heady drink to those
about to die, and wine to those that sorrow.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dysmas drank abundantly of the soporific,
and held the gourd to his comrade.
</p>

<p>
<q>Take it, Stegas.</q>
</p>

<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>

<p>
As the second thief raised it to his lips,
with a motion of arm and knee an executioner
caught Dysmas beneath the chin,
behind the leg, and the thief lay on a
cross. In a second his wrists were bound,
his feet as well. There was the blow of
a hammer on a nail, a spurt of blood from
the open hand; another blow, another
spurt; and the cross, upraised, settled in
a cavity already prepared, a beam behind
it for support.
</p>

<p>
Stegas, his thirst slaked, fell as Dysmas
had, and the elder caught the gourd and
offered it to the Christ. If he had been
tempted in the desert, as rumor alleged,
the temptation could have been as nothing
in comparison to the enticements of
that cup. It held relief from thought,
from the acutest pain that flesh can know,
from life, from death.
</p>

<p>
He waved it aside. The executioner
started with surprise; but he had his
duty to perform, and, recovering himself,
he caught the Christ, and in a moment he
too was down, his hands transfixed, the
cross upraised. The blood dripped
lei<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>surely on the sand beneath. Across his
features a shadow passed and vanished.
His lips moved.
</p>

<p>
<q>Father,</q> he murmured, <q>forgive
them; they know not what they do.</q>
</p>

<p>
Calcol gave an order. Over the heads
of Dysmas and of Stegas the sanis were
affixed, wooden tablets smeared with
gypsum, bearing the name of the crucified
and with it the offence. They were
simple and terse; but above the Christ
appeared a legend in three tongues, in
Aramaic, in Greek, and in Latin:
</p>
<pgIf output="txt"><then><p rend="center">[Aramaic: Mâlkâ dî Jehudâje]</p></then>
<else><pgIf output="pdf"><then><p rend="center"><figure url="images/titulus.png"><figDesc>Aramaic: Mâlkâ dî Jehudâje</figDesc></figure></p></then>
<else><p rend="center"><figure url="images/titulus.png"><figDesc>Aramaic: Mâlkâ dî Jehudâje</figDesc></figure></p></else>
</pgIf></else></pgIf>
    <p rend="center"><foreign rend="Greek" lang="el">Ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν Ἰουδαίων.</foreign></p>
    <p rend="center">Rex Judæorum.</p>
<p>
Caiaphas sprang back as from the
point of a sword.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mâlkâ dî Jehudâje!</q> he bellowed.
<q>King of the Jews! It is a blasphemy,
an iniquity, and an outrage. Centurion,
tear it down.</q>
</p>

<p>
Calcol shrugged his shoulders, and
pointed to the palace. <q>What the procurator
has written he has written,</q> he
answered.
</p>

<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>

<p>
In the tone, in the gesture that preceded
it, and in its impertinence Caiaphas
read Pilate’s one yet supreme revenge,
the expression of his absolute contempt
for the whole Sanhedrim and the nation
that it ruled.
</p>

<p>
From the rear the mob jumped at the
title as at a catchword. To them the
irony of the procurator presumably was
lost.
</p>

<p>
<q>King of the Jews!</q> they shouted.
<q>Mâlkâ dî Jehudâje, come down from
your cross!</q>
</p>

<p>
It was a great festival, and as they
jeered at Jesus they enjoyed themselves
hugely.
</p>

<p>
In their vast delight the voice of Stegas
was drowned.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am a Roman citizen,</q> he kept repeating,
his head swaying, and indicating
with his eyes the wounds in his hands,
the torture he endured. <q>Kill me,</q> he
implored. And finding entreaty idle, he
reviled the centurion, cursed the soldiery,
and would have spat at them, but to his
burning throat no spittle came.
</p>

<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>

<p>
The tongue of Dysmas lolled from his
mouth. He had not the ability to speak,
even if in speech relief could come.
Flame licked at his flesh, his joints were
severing, each artery was a nerve exposed,
and something was crunching his brain.
He could no longer groan; he could
suffer merely, such suffering as hell perhaps
has failed to contrive, that apogee
of agony which it was left for man to
devise.
</p>

<p>
Stegas, catching the refrain the mob
repeated, turned his eyes from the soldiery
to the adjacent cross.
</p>

<p>
<q>If you are as they say,</q> he cried,
<q>save yourself and us.</q>
</p>

<p>
As a taunt to Caiaphas, Calcol echoed,
<q>Behold your king!</q> and raising a stalk
of hyssop, on which was a sponge that he
had dipped in the posca, the thin wine
the soldiers drink, he offered it to the
Christ.
</p>

<p>
The sun was nearing the horizon.
Caiaphas gathered his ample folds about
him. He had seen enough. The feast,
wretchedly embittered, was nearly done.
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>There was another at which he must officiate:
the shofa presently would sound;
the skewering of the Paschal lamb it was
needful for him to superintend. It was
time, he knew, to return to the Temple;
and as he gave a last indignant look at
the placard, the lips of the Christ parted
to one despairing cry:
</p>

<p>
<q>Elî, Elî, lemâh shebâktanî?</q>
</p>

<p>
Caiaphas, nodding to the elders, smiled
with satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
At last the false pretender was forced
to acknowledge the invalidity of his
claims. The Father whose son he vaunted
himself to be had disowned him when
his recognition was needed, if ever it had
been needed at all. And so, with the
smile of one whose labor has had its
recompense, Caiaphas patted his skirt,
and the elders about him strolled back
through the Gannath Gate to the Temple
that awaited him.
</p>

<p>
The multitude meanwhile had decreased.
To the crowd also the Temple
had its attractions, its duties, and its
offices. Moreover, the spectacle was at
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>an end. With a blow of the mallet the
legs of the thieves had been broken.
They had died without a shriek, a thing
to be regretted. The Galilean too,
pierced by the level stroke of a spear,
had succumbed without a word. Sundown
was approaching. Clearly it was
best to be within the walls where other
gayeties were. The mob dispersed, leaving
behind but the dead, the circling
vultures, a group of soldiers throwing dice
for the garments of the crucified, and,
remotely, a group of women huddled
beneath a protecting oak.
</p>

<p>
During the hour or two that intervened,
the force which had visited Mary evaporated
in strength overtaxed. She was
conscious only that she suffocated. The
words of the women that had drawn her
to them were empty as blanks in a dream;
the jeers of the mob vacant as an empty
bier. To but one thing was she alive,
the fact that death could be. Little by
little, as the impossible merged into the
actual, the understanding came to her
that the worst that could be had been
<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>done, and she ceased to suffer. The departing
hierarchy, the dispersing mob,
retreating before encroaching night, left
her unimpressed. To her the setting sun
was Christ.
</p>

<p>
The soldiers passed. She did not see
them. Calcol called to her. She did
not hear. The women had gone from
her; she did not notice it. She stood as
a cataleptic might, her eyes on the cross.
Once only, when the Christ had uttered
his despairing cry, she too had cried in
her despair. In the roar of the mob the
cry was lost as a stone tossed in the sea.
Since then she had been dumb, sightless
also, existing, if at all, unconsciously, her
life-springs nourished by death.
</p>

<p>
Though she gazed at the cross, she had
ceased to distinguish it. A little group
that had reached it before the soldiery
left had been unmarked by her. On the
platform of her dream a serpent had
emerged. In its coils were her immortal
hopes. It was that she saw, and that
alone. Those moments of agony in
which the imagination oscillates between
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>the past and the future, devouring the
one, fumbling the other, had been endured,
and resignation failed to bring its
balm. She had believed with a faith so
firm that now in its demolition there was
nothing left—an abyss merely, where
light was not.
</p>

<p>
A hand touched her, and she quivered
as a leaf does at the wing of a bird.
<q>Mary, come with us,</q> some one was
saying; <q>we are taking him to a tomb.</q>
</p>

<p>
Just beyond were men and women
whom she knew. Joseph of Haramathaïm,
a close follower of the Master;
Nikodemon, the richest man in all Judæa;
Johanna, Mary Clopas, Salomè, Bernice,
and the servants of the opulent Jew. It
was Ahulah who had touched her; and as
Mary started she saw before her a coffin
which the others bore.
</p>

<p>
<q>Come with us,</q> Ahulah repeated; and
Mary crossed the intervening ridge to
where the gardens were and the tombs
she had already passed.
</p>

<p>
At the door of a sepulchre the brief
procession halted. Within was a room,
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>a little grotto furnished with a stone slab
and a lamp that flickered, surmounted by
an arch. The coffin, placed on the slab,
routed a bat that flew to the arch, and a
lizard that scurried to a crevice. In the
coffin the Christ lay, his head wrapped in
a napkin, the body wound about by
broad bands of linen that were secured
with gum and impregnated with spices
and with myrrh. The odor of aromatics
filled the tomb. The bat escaped to the
night. A stone was rolled before the
opening, the brief procession withdrew,
and Mary was left with the dead.
</p>

<p>
The momentary exertion, the bier, the
sepulchre, the sight of the Christ in his
cerements, the brooding quiet—these
things had roused her. Her mind was
nimbler, and thought more active. One
by one the stars appeared. They would
vanish, she told herself, as her hopes had
done. Only they would reappear, and
belief could not. It had come as a rainbow
does, and disappeared as vaporously,
little by little, before the full glare of
might. For a minute, hours perhaps, she
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>stood quite still, interrogating the past
in which so much had been, gauging the
future in which so much was to be. The
one retreated, the other fled. Thoughts
came to her evanescently, and faded before
they were wholly formed. At one
moment she was beckoning the unicorns
from the desert, the winged lions from the
yonderland, commanding them to bear
her to the home of some immense revenge.
At others she was asking her way of
griffins, propounding the problem to the
Sphinx. But the unicorns and lions took
flight, the griffins spread their wings, the
Sphinx fell asleep. There was no answer
to her appeal.
</p>

<p>
Behind the sepulchre the moon rose; it
dropped a beam near by. There is light
somewhere, it seemed to say; and in that
telegram from Above, she thought of
Rome. She remembered now, in Rome
was Tiberius, and in him Revenge. She
smiled at her own forgetfulness. Yes, it
was there. She would go to him, she
would exact reparation; there should be
another crucifixion. Pilate should be
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>nailed to the cross, Judas on one side,
Caiaphas on the other. Only it would be
at Rome where there was no Passover to
interfere with the torture they endured.
Things were done better there. Men were
crucified, not with the head up, but with
the feet; and so remained, not for hours,
but for days; and died, not of their wounds
alone, but of hunger too.
</p>

<p>
A chariot of dream caught her, and,
borne across the intervening space, she saw
herself in a palace where there were gods
and monsters, columns of transparent
quartz, floors of malachite, roofs of gold.
And there, on a dais, the Cæsar lay.
Behind him a fan, luminous as a peacock’s
tail, oscillated to the tinkling of
mysterious keys. In his crown was the
lividity of uncolored dawns, in his sceptre
the dominion of the world. An ulcer devoured
his face, and in his ear a boy repeated
the maxims of Elephantis. Mary
threw herself at his feet, her tears fell on
them as rain on leaves. <q>Vengeance,</q>
she implored; but he listened merely to
the boy at his side. <q>Death is your
ser<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>vant,</q> she cried. <q>You command, it
obeys.</q> The ulcer oozed, the face grew
vague, he gave no answer. She stood up
and menaced him. <q>Behind you spectres
crouch; you may not see them. I do; their
name is To-morrow.</q> The murmurs of
the boy were her sole reply. The roof
crumbled, the flooring disappeared, the
emperor faded, and Mary stared into
space.
</p>

<p>
The moon that had struck aslant the
tomb had gone, but where its beams had
fallen the message remained. There is
light somewhere, it repeated. Across the
heavens a meteor shot like a bee. In the
air voices whispered confusedly. It is
not in Rome, one seemed to say. It is
not on earth, another called.
</p>

<p>
Mary clutched at her beating breast.
The sky now was an opening rose. What
the sunset had sown the dawn would reap.
In the night that had enveloped, day
raised a lattice, and through it came a
gust of higher thought. It is not in revenge,
a voice whispered. It is not in
regret, another called.
</p>

<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>

<p>
<q>I know it,</q> Mary gasped. <q>Yes, yes,
I know it now. It is in faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And in abnegation of self.</q>
</p>

<p>
The stone which stood before the sepulchre
had rolled away. At her side the
Christ stood. In his eyes were golden
parables, in his face Truth shone revealed.
She stared, dumb with the unexpected
joy of belief confirmed, blinded by the
sudden light, while he who had rent the
bonds of death passed on into the budding
day.
</p>

<p>
When the brief procession of the night
before returned to the tomb, it was empty.
At the door Mary lay, her arms outstretched
and vacant.
</p>

<p rend="margin-top:2; center">
<hi rend="font-size: small">FINIS MARIÆ.</hi>
</p>
        </div></body>
        <back rend="page-break-before: right">
            <div rend="x-class: boxed">
                <index index="toc"/><index index="pdf" level1="Transcriber's note"/>
                <head>Transcriber’s note</head>
            <p>The table of contents has been added in the electronic version.</p>
                <p>The following changes have been made to the text:</p>
                <list>
                    <item><ref target="corr036">page 36</ref>, <q>forget</q> changed to <q>forgot</q>, <q>Hew</q> changed to <q>Her</q></item>
                    <item><ref target="corr038">page 38</ref>, <q>a</q> added before <q>sword</q></item>
                    <item><ref target="corr046">page 46</ref>, period added following <q>roof</q></item>
                    <item><ref target="corr108">page 108</ref>, <q>surperber</q> changed to <q>superber</q></item>
                    <item><ref target="corr118">page 118</ref>, <q>is</q> changed to <q>it</q></item>
                </list>
            </div>
            <div rend="page-break-before: always">
                <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
            </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
